<html><body><pre>
[Title 7 CFR ]
[Code of Federal Regulations (annual edition) - January 1, 1997 Edition]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]


          7


<R02>
          Agriculture

<R03>

[[Page i]]

          PARTS 210 TO 299

          Revised as of January 1, 1997
          CONTAINING
          A CODIFICATION OF DOCUMENTS
          OF GENERAL APPLICABILITY
          AND FUTURE EFFECT

          AS OF JANUARY 1, 1997
          With Ancillaries
          Published by
          the Office of the Federal Register
          National Archives and Records
          Administration

          as a Special Edition of
          the Federal Register



[[Page ii]]

                                      




                     U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                            WASHINGTON : 1997



               For sale by U.S. Government Printing Office
 Superintendent of Documents, Mail Stop: SSOP, Washington, DC 20402-9328



[[Page iii]]



<R02>
                            Table of Contents


<R03>
                                                                    Page
  Explanation.................................................       v

  Title 7:
      Subtitle B--Regulations of the Department of Agriculture (Continued):


          Chapter II--Food and Consumer Service, Department of 
          Agriculture                                                5
  Finding Aids:
    Material Approved for Incorporation by Reference..........     907
    Table of CFR Titles and Chapters..........................     909
    Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR........     925
    Redesignation Table.......................................     935
    List of CFR Sections Affected.............................     937

[[Page iv]]



      



                                                                                                                
                                  ----------------------------------------------------------                    

  Cite this Code:  CFR                                                         
                                                                                                                
  To cite the regulations in this volume, use title, part,                     
  and section number. Thus, 7 CFR 210.1 refers to title                       
  7, part 210, section 1.                                                     
                                  ----------------------------------------------------------                    
                                                                                                                


[[Page v]]

                               EXPLANATION

    The Code of Federal Regulations is a codification of the general and 
permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the Executive 
departments and agencies of the Federal Government. The Code is divided 
into 50 titles which represent broad areas subject to Federal 
regulation. Each title is divided into chapters which usually bear the 
name of the issuing agency. Each chapter is further subdivided into 
parts covering specific regulatory areas.
    Each volume of the Code is revised at least once each calendar year 
and issued on a quarterly basis approximately as follows:

Title 1 through Title 16.................................as of January 1
Title 17 through Title 27..................................as of April 1
Title 28 through Title 41...................................as of July 1
Title 42 through Title 50................................as of October 1
    The appropriate revision date is printed on the cover of each 
volume.

LEGAL STATUS

    The contents of the Federal Register are required to be judicially 
noticed (44 U.S.C. 1507). The Code of Federal Regulations is prima facie 
evidence of the text of the original documents (44 U.S.C. 1510).

HOW TO USE THE CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS

    The Code of Federal Regulations is kept up to date by the individual 
issues of the Federal Register. These two publications must be used 
together to determine the latest version of any given rule.
    To determine whether a Code volume has been amended since its 
revision date (in this case, January 1, 1997), consult the ``List of CFR 
Sections Affected (LSA),'' which is issued monthly, and the ``Cumulative 
List of Parts Affected,'' which appears in the Reader Aids section of 
the daily Federal Register. These two lists will identify the Federal 
Register page number of the latest amendment of any given rule.

EFFECTIVE AND EXPIRATION DATES

    Each volume of the Code contains amendments published in the Federal 
Register since the last revision of that volume of the Code. Source 
citations for the regulations are referred to by volume number and page 
number of the Federal Register and date of publication. Publication 
dates and effective dates are usually not the same and care must be 
exercised by the user in determining the actual effective date. In 
instances where the effective date is beyond the cut-off date for the 
Code a note has been inserted to reflect the future effective date. In 
those instances where a regulation published in the Federal Register 
states a date certain for expiration, an appropriate note will be 
inserted following the text.

OMB CONTROL NUMBERS

    The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-511) requires 
Federal agencies to display an OMB control number with their information 
collection request.

[[Page vi]]

Many agencies have begun publishing numerous OMB control numbers as 
amendments to existing regulations in the CFR. These OMB numbers are 
placed as close as possible to the applicable recordkeeping or reporting 
requirements.

OBSOLETE PROVISIONS

    Provisions that become obsolete before the revision date stated on 
the cover of each volume are not carried. Code users may find the text 
of provisions in effect on a given date in the past by using the 
appropriate numerical list of sections affected. For the period before 
January 1, 1986, consult either the List of CFR Sections Affected, 1949-
1963, 1964-1972, or 1973-1985, published in seven separate volumes. For 
the period beginning January 1, 1986, a ``List of CFR Sections 
Affected'' is published at the end of each CFR volume.

INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE

    What is incorporation by reference? Incorporation by reference was 
established by statute and allows Federal agencies to meet the 
requirement to publish regulations in the Federal Register by referring 
to materials already published elsewhere. For an incorporation to be 
valid, the Director of the Federal Register must approve it. The legal 
effect of incorporation by reference is that the material is treated as 
if it were published in full in the Federal Register (5 U.S.C. 552(a)). 
This material, like any other properly issued regulation, has the force 
of law.
    What is a proper incorporation by reference? The Director of the 
Federal Register will approve an incorporation by reference only when 
the requirements of 1 CFR part 51 are met. Some of the elements on which 
approval is based are:
    (a) The incorporation will substantially reduce the volume of 
material published in the Federal Register.
    (b) The matter incorporated is in fact available to the extent 
necessary to afford fairness and uniformity in the administrative 
process.
    (c) The incorporating document is drafted and submitted for 
publication in accordance with 1 CFR part 51.
    Properly approved incorporations by reference in this volume are 
listed in the Finding Aids at the end of this volume.
    What if the material incorporated by reference cannot be found? If 
you have any problem locating or obtaining a copy of material listed in 
the Finding Aids of this volume as an approved incorporation by 
reference, please contact the agency that issued the regulation 
containing that incorporation. If, after contacting the agency, you find 
the material is not available, please notify the Director of the Federal 
Register, National Archives and Records Administration, Washington DC 
20408, or call (202) 523-4534.

CFR INDEXES AND TABULAR GUIDES

    A subject index to the Code of Federal Regulations is contained in a 
separate volume, revised annually as of January 1, entitled CFR Index 
and Finding Aids. This volume contains the Parallel Table of Statutory 
Authorities and Agency Rules (Table I), and Acts Requiring Publication 
in the Federal Register (Table II). A list of CFR titles, chapters, and 
parts and an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are 
also included in this volume.
    An index to the text of ``Title 3--The President'' is carried within 
that volume.
    The Federal Register Index is issued monthly in cumulative form. 
This index is based on a consolidation of the ``Contents'' entries in 
the daily Federal Register.

[[Page vii]]

    A List of CFR Sections Affected (LSA) is published monthly, keyed to 
the revision dates of the 50 CFR titles.

REPUBLICATION OF MATERIAL

    There are no restrictions on the republication of material appearing 
in the Code of Federal Regulations.

INQUIRIES

    For a legal interpretation or explanation of any regulation in this 
volume, contact the issuing agency. The issuing agency's name appears at 
the top of odd-numbered pages.
    For inquiries concerning CFR reference assistance, call 202-523-5227 
or write to the Director, Office of the Federal Register, National 
Archives and Records Administration, Washington, DC 20408.
SALES

    The Government Printing Office (GPO) processes all sales and 
distribution of the CFR. For payment by credit card, call 202-512-1800, 
M-F, 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. e.s.t. or fax your order to 202-512-2233, 24 hours 
a day. For payment by check, write to the Superintendent of Documents, 
Attn: New Orders, P.O. Box 371954, Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954. For GPO 
Customer Service call 202-512-1803.

                              Richard L. Claypoole,
                                    Director,
                          Office of the Federal Register.

January 1, 1997.



[[Page ix]]



                               THIS TITLE

    Title 7--Agriculture is composed of fifteen volumes. The parts in 
these volumes are arranged in the following order: parts 0-26, 27-52, 
53-209, 210-299, 300-399, 400-699, 700-899, 900-999, 1000-1199, 1200-
1499, 1500-1899, 1900-1939, 1940-1949, 1950-1999, and part 2000 to end. 
The contents of these volumes represent all current regulations codified 
under this title of the CFR as of January 1, 1997.

    The Food and Consumer Service current regulations in the volume 
containing parts 210-299, include the Child Nutrition Programs and the 
Food Stamp Program. The regulations of the Federal Crop Insurance 
Corporation are found in the volume containing parts 400-699.

    All marketing agreements and orders for fruits, vegetables and nuts 
appear in the one volume containing parts 900-999. All marketing 
agreements and orders for milk appear in the volume containing parts 
1000-1199. Part 900--General Regulations is carried as a note in the 
volume containing parts 1000-1199, as a convenience to the user.

    Redesignation tables appear in the Finding Aids section of the 
volumes containing parts 210-299 and parts 1500-1899.

    For this volume, Gwendolyn J. Henderson was Chief Editor. The Code 
of Federal Regulations publication program is under the direction of 
Frances D. McDonald, assisted by Alomha S. Morris.

[[Page x]]

<GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT>

 
[[Page 1]]


<R01>
                          TITLE 7--AGRICULTURE


<R02>

                  (This book contains parts 210 to 299)

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

SUBTITLE B--Regulations of the Department of Agriculture (Continued):

                                                                    Part
Chapter ii--Food and Consumer Service, Department of 
  Agriculture...............................................         210


[[Page 3]]



  Subtitle B--Regulations of the Department of Agriculture (Continued)

[[Page 5]]


<R02>
    CHAPTER II--FOOD AND CONSUMER SERVICE, DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

  Editorial Note: Nomenclature changes to chapter II appear at 59 FR 
60062, Nov. 22, 1994, and 60 FR 19490, Apr. 19, 1995.

                 SUBCHAPTER A--CHILD NUTRITION PROGRAMS
Part                                                                Page

210             National School Lunch Program...............           7
215             Special Milk Program for Children...........          74
220             School Breakfast Program....................          88
225             Summer Food Service Program.................         117
226             Child and Adult Care Food Program...........         165
227             Nutrition Education and Training Program....         223
235             State administrative expense funds..........         233
240             Cash in lieu of donated foods...............         245
245             Determining eligibility for free and reduced 
                    price meals and free milk in schools....         251
246             Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for 
                    Women, Infants and Children.............         265
247             Commodity Supplemental Food Program.........         332
248             WIC Farmers' Market Nutrition Program (FMNP)         354
    SUBCHAPTER B--GENERAL REGULATIONS AND POLICIES--FOOD DISTRIBUTION
250             Donation of foods for use in the United 
                    States, its territories and possessions 
                    and areas under its jurisdiction........         376
251             The Emergency Food Assistance Program.......         423
252             National Commodity Processing Program.......         432
253             Administration of the Food Distribution 
                    Program for households on Indian 
                    reservations............................         441
254             Administration of the Food Distribution 
                    Program for Indian households in 
                    Oklahoma................................         467
         SUBCHAPTER C--FOOD STAMP AND FOOD DISTRIBUTION PROGRAM
271             General information and definitions.........         469
272             Requirements for participating State 
                    agencies................................         487

[[Page 6]]

273             Certification of eligible households........         546
274             Issuance and use of coupons.................         720
275             Performance reporting system................         761
276             State agency liabilities and Federal 
                    sanctions...............................         798
277             Payments of certain administrative costs of 
                    State agencies..........................         807
278             Participation of retail food stores, 
                    wholesale food concerns and insured 
                    financial institutions..................         844
279             Administrative and judicial review--food 
                    retailers and food wholesalers..........         866
280             Emergency food assistance for victims of 
                    disasters...............................         871
281             Administration of the Food Stamp Program on 
                    Indian reservations.....................         871
282             Demonstration, research, and evaluation 
                    projects................................         877
283             Appeals of quality control (``QC'') claims..         878
284             Provision of a nutrition assistance program 
                    for the Commonwealth of the Northern 
                    Mariana Islands (CNMI) [Reserved]
285             Provision of a nutrition assistance grant 
                    for the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.....         897
                    SUBCHAPTER D--GENERAL REGULATIONS
295             Availability of information and records to 
                    the public..............................         901
296-299 
[Reserved]

[[Page 7]]


<R03>
                 SUBCHAPTER A--CHILD NUTRITION PROGRAMS

<R05>


<R03>
PART 210--NATIONAL SCHOOL LUNCH PROGRAM--Table of Contents

<R05>


                           Subpart A--General

Sec.
210.1  General purpose and scope.
210.2  Definitions.
210.3  Administration.

 Subpart B--Reimbursement Process for States and School Food Authorities

210.4  Cash and donated food assistance to States.
210.5  Payment process to States.
210.6  Use of Federal funds.
210.7  Reimbursement for school food authorities.
210.8  Claims for reimbursement.

     Subpart C--Requirements for School Food Authority Participation

210.9  Agreement with State agency.
210.10  Nutrition standards for lunches and menu planning methods.
210.10a  Lunch components and quantities for the meal pattern.
210.11  Competitive food services.
210.12  Student, parent and community involvement.
210.13  Facilities management.
210.14  Resource management.
210.15  Reporting and recordkeeping.
210.16  Food service management companies.

         Subpart D--Requirements for State Agency Participation

210.17  Matching Federal funds.
210.18  Administrative reviews.
210.18a  Assessment, improvement and monitoring system.
210.19  Additional responsibilities.
210.20  Reporting and recordkeeping.

   Subpart E--State Agency and School Food Authority Responsibilities

210.21  Procurement.
210.22  Audits.
210.23  Other responsibilities.

                    Subpart F--Additional Provisions

210.24  Withholding payments.
210.25  Suspension, termination and grant closeout procedures.
210.26  Penalties.
210.27  Educational prohibitions.
210.28  State Food Distribution Advisory Council.
210.29  Pilot project exemptions.
210.30  Management evaluations.
210.31  Regional office addresses.
210.32  OMB control numbers.

Appendix A to Part 210--Alternate Foods for Meals
Appendix B to Part 210--Categories of Foods of Minimal Nutritional Value
Appendix C to Part 210--Child Nutrition Labeling Program

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 1751-1760, 1779.

    Source: 53 FR 29147, Aug. 2, 1988, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                           Subpart A--General


<R05>
Sec. 210.1  General purpose and scope.

    (a) Purpose of the program. Section 2 of the National School Lunch 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1751), states: ``It is declared to be the policy of 
Congress, as a measure of national security, to safeguard the health and 
well-being of the Nation's children and to encourage the domestic 
consumption of nutritious agricultural commodities and other food, by 
assisting the States, through grants-in-aid and other means, in 
providing an adequate supply of food and other facilities for the 
establishment, maintenance, operation, and expansion of nonprofit school 
lunch programs.'' Pursuant to this act, the Department provides States 
with general and special cash assistance and donations of foods acquired 
by the Department to be used to assist schools in serving nutritious 
lunches to children each school day. In furtherance of Program 
objectives, participating schools shall serve lunches that are 
nutritionally adequate, as set forth in these regulations, and shall to 
the extent practicable, ensure that participating children gain a full 
understanding of the relationship between proper eating and good health.
    (b) Scope of the regulations. This part sets forth the requirements 
for participation in the National School Lunch and Commodity School 
Programs. It specifies Program responsibilities of State and local 
officials in the areas of program administration, preparation and 
service of nutritious lunches, payment of funds, use of program funds,

[[Page 8]]

program monitoring, and reporting and recordkeeping requirements.


<R05>
Sec. 210.2  Definitions.

    For the purpose of this part:
    Act means the National School Lunch Act, as amended.
    Afterschool care program means a program providing organized child 
care services to enrolled school-age children afterschool hours for the 
purpose of care and supervision of children. Those programs shall be 
distinct from any extracurricular programs organized primarily for 
scholastic, cultural or athletic purposes.
    Attendance factor means a percentage developed no less than once 
each school year which accounts for the difference between enrollment 
and attendance. The attendance factor may be developed by the school 
food authority, subject to State agency approval, or may be developed by 
the State agency. In the absence of a local or State attendance factor, 
the school food authority shall use an attendance factor developed by 
FCS. When taking the attendance factor into consideration, school food 
authorities shall assume that all children eligible for free and reduced 
price lunches attend school at the same rate as the general school 
population.
    Average Daily Participation means the average number of children, by 
eligibility category, participating in the Program each operating day. 
These numbers are obtained by dividing (a) the total number of free 
lunches claimed during a reporting period by the number of operating 
days in the same period; (b) the total number of reduced price lunches 
claimed during a reporting period by the number of operating days in the 
same period; and (c) the total number of paid lunches claimed during a 
reporting period by the number of operating days in the same period.
    Child means--(a) a student of high school grade or under as 
determined by the State educational agency, who is enrolled in an 
educational unit of high school grade or under as described in 
paragraphs (a) and (b) of the definition of ``School,'' including 
students who are mentally or physically handicapped as defined by the 
State and who are participating in a school program established for the 
mentally or physically handicapped; or (b) a person under 21 
chronological years of age who is enrolled in an institution or center 
as described in paragraphs (c) and (d) of the definition of ``School;'' 
or (c) For purposes of reimbursement for meal supplements served in 
afterschool care programs, an individual enrolled in an afterschool care 
program operated by an eligible school who is 12 years of age or under, 
or in the case of children of migrant workers and children with 
handicaps, not more than 15 years of age.
    CND means the Child Nutrition Division of the Food and Consumer 
Service of the Department.
    Commodity School Program means the Program under which participating 
schools operate a nonprofit lunch program in accordance with this part 
and receive donated food assistance in lieu of general cash assistance. 
Schools participating in the Commodity School Program shall also receive 
special cash and donated food assistance in accordance with 
Sec. 210.4(c).
    Days means calendar days unless otherwise specified.
    Department means the United States Department of Agriculture.
    Distributing agency means a State agency which enters into an 
agreement with the Department for the distribution to schools of donated 
foods pursuant to part 250 of this chapter.
    Donated foods means food commodities donated by the Department for 
use in nonprofit lunch programs.
    FCS means the Food and Consumer Service, United States Department of 
Agriculture.
    FCSRO means the appropriate Regional Office of the Food and Consumer 
Service of the Department.
    Fiscal year means a period of 12 calendar months beginning October 1 
of any year and ending with September 30 of the following year.
    Food component means one of the four food groups which compose the 
reimbursable school lunch, i.e., meat or meat alternate, milk, grains/
breads and vegetables/fruits for the purposes of Sec. 210.10(k) or one 
of the four food groups which compose the reimbursable school lunch, 
i.e., meat or meat alternate,

[[Page 9]]

milk, bread or bread alternate, and vegetable/fruit under Sec. 210.10a.
    Food item means one of the five required foods that compose the 
reimbursable school lunch, i.e., meat or meat alternate, milk, grains/
breads, and two (2) servings of vegetables, fruits, or a combination of 
both for the purposes of Sec. 210.10(k) or one of the five required 
foods that compose the reimbursable school lunch, i.e., meat or meat 
alternate, milk, bread or bread alternate, and two (2) servings of 
vegetables, fruits, or a combination of both for the purposes of 
Sec. 210.10a.
    Food service management company means a commercial enterprise or a 
nonprofit organization which is or may be contracted with by the school 
food authority to manage any aspect of the school food service.
    Free lunch means a lunch served under the Program to a child from a 
household eligible for such benefits under 7 CFR part 245 and for which 
neither the child nor any member of the household pays or is required to 
work.
    Handicapped student means any child who has a physical or mental 
impairment as defined in Sec. 15b.3 of the Department's 
nondiscrimination regulations (7 CFR part 15b).
    Lunch means a meal which meets the nutrition standards and the 
appropriate nutrient and calorie levels designated in Sec. 210.10. In 
addition, if applicable, a lunch shall meet the requirements by age/
grade groupings in Sec. 210.10(k)(2) or the school lunch pattern for 
specified age/grade groups of children as designated in Sec. 210.10a.
    Menu item means, under Nutrient Standard Menu Planning or Assisted 
Nutrient Standard Menu Planning, any single food or combination of 
foods. All menu items or foods offered as part of the reimbursable meal 
may be considered as contributing towards meeting the nutrition 
standards provided in Sec. 210.10, except for those foods that are 
considered as foods of minimal nutritional value as provided for in 
Sec. 210.11(a)(2) which are not offered as part of a menu item in a 
reimbursable meal. For the purposes of a reimbursable lunch, a minimum 
of three menu items must be offered, one of which must be an entree (a 
combination of foods or a single food item that is offered as the main 
course) and one of which must be fluid milk. Under offer versus serve, a 
student shall select, at a minimum, an entree and one other menu item. 
If more than three menu items are offered, the student may decline up to 
two menu items; however, the entree cannot be declined.
    National School Lunch Program means the Program under which 
participating schools operate a nonprofit lunch program in accordance 
with this part. General and special cash assistance and donated food 
assistance are made available to schools in accordance with this part.
    Net cash resources means all monies, as determined in accordance 
with the State agency's established accounting system, that are 
available to or have accrued to a school food authority's nonprofit 
school food service at any given time, less cash payable. Such monies 
may include, but are not limited to, cash on hand, cash receivable, 
earnings on investments, cash on deposit and the value of stocks, bonds 
or other negotiable securities.
    Nonprofit, when applied to schools or institutions eligible for the 
Program, means exempt from income tax under section 501(c)(3) of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended; or, in the Commonwealth of 
Puerto Rico, certified as nonprofit by the Governor.
    Nonprofit school food service means all food service operations 
conducted by the school food authority principally for the benefit of 
schoolchildren, all of the revenue from which is used solely for the 
operation or improvement of such food services.
    Nutrient Standard Menu Planning/Assisted Nutrient Standard Menu 
Planning mean ways to develop menus based on the analysis for nutrients 
in the menu items and foods offered over a school week to determine if 
specific levels for a set of key nutrients and calories were met. Such 
analysis is based on averages weighted in accordance with the criteria 
in Sec. 210.10(i)(5). Such analysis is normally done by a school or a 
school food authority. However, for the purposes of Assisted Nutrient 
Standard Menu Planning, menu planning and analysis are completed by 
other entities and shall incorporate the production quantities needed to 
accommodate

[[Page 10]]

the specific service requirements of a particular school or school food 
authority.
    OIG means the Office of the Inspector General of the Department.
    Point of Service means that point in the food service operation 
where a determination can accurately be made that a reimbursable free, 
reduced price or paid lunch has been served to an eligible child.
    Program means the National School Lunch Program and the Commodity 
School Program.
    Reduced price lunch means a lunch served under the Program: (a) to a 
child from a household eligible for such benefits under 7 CFR part 245; 
(b) for which the price is less than the school food authority 
designated full price of the lunch and which does not exceed the maximum 
allowable reduced price specified under 7 CFR part 245; and (c) for 
which neither the child nor any member of the household is required to 
work.
    Reimbursement means Federal cash assistance including advances paid 
or payable to participating schools for lunches meeting the requirements 
of Sec. 210.10 and served to eligible children.
    Revenue, when applied to nonprofit school food service, means all 
monies received by or accruing to the nonprofit school food service in 
accordance with the State agency's established accounting system 
including, but not limited to, children's payments, earnings on 
investments, other local revenues, State revenues, and Federal cash 
reimbursements.
    School means: (a) An educational unit of high school grade or under, 
recognized as part of the educational system in the State and operating 
under public or nonprofit private ownership in a single building or 
complex of buildings; (b) any public or nonprofit private classes of 
preprimary grade when they are conducted in the aforementioned schools; 
(c) any public or nonprofit private residential child care institution, 
or distinct part of such institution, which operates principally for the 
care of children, and, if private, is licensed to provide residential 
child care services under the appropriate licensing code by the State or 
a subordinate level of government, except for residential summer camps 
which participate in the Summer Food Service Program for Children, Job 
Corps centers funded by the Department of Labor, and private foster 
homes. The term ``residential child care institutions'' includes, but is 
not limited to: homes for the mentally, emotionally or physically 
impaired, and unmarried mothers and their infants; group homes; halfway 
houses; orphanages; temporary shelters for abused children and for 
runaway children; long-term care facilities for chronically ill 
children; and juvenile detention centers. A long-term care facility is a 
hospital, skilled nursing facility, intermediate care facility, or 
distinct part thereof, which is intended for the care of children 
confined for 30 days or more; or (d) with respect to the Commonwealth of 
Puerto Rico, nonprofit child care centers certified as such by the 
Governor of Puerto Rico.
    School food authority means the governing body which is responsible 
for the administration of one or more schools; and has the legal 
authority to operate the Program therein or be otherwise approved by FCS 
to operate the Program.
    School week means the period of time used to determine compliance 
with the nutrition standards and the appropriate calorie and nutrient 
levels in Sec. 210.10. Further, if applicable, school week is the basis 
for conducting Nutrient Standard Menu Planning or Assisted Nutrient 
Standard Menu Planning for lunches as provided in Sec. 210.10(i) and 
Sec. 210.10(j). The period shall be a normal school week of five 
consecutive days; however, to accommodate shortened weeks resulting from 
holidays and other scheduling needs, the period shall be a minimum of 
three consecutive days and a maximum of seven consecutive days. Weeks in 
which school lunches are offered less than three times shall be combined 
with either the previous or the coming week.
    School year means a period of 12 calendar months beginning July 1 of 
any year and ending June 30 of the following year.
    Secretary means the Secretary of Agriculture.

[[Page 11]]

    7 CFR part 3015, means the Uniform Federal Assistance Regulations 
published by the Department to implement Office of Management and Budget 
Circulars A-21, A-87, A-102, A-110, A-122, A-124, and A-128; the Single 
Audit Act of 1984 (31 U.S.C. 7501 et seq.); and Executive Order 12372.

    Note: OMB Circulars, referred to in this definition, are available 
from the EOP Publications, New Executive Office Building, 726 Jackson 
Place NW, Room 2200, Washington, DC 20503.

    State means any of the 50 States, District of Columbia, the 
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, 
the Commonwealth of the Northern Marianas, or the Federated States of 
Micronesia, the Republic of the Marshalls, and the Republic of Palau.
    State agency means (a) the State educational agency; (b) any other 
agency of the State which has been designated by the Governor or other 
appropriate executive or legislative authority of the State and approved 
by the Department to administer the Program in schools, as specified in 
Sec. 210.3(b); or (c) the FCSRO, where the FCSRO administers the Program 
as specified in Sec. 210.3(c).
    State educational agency means, as the State legislature may 
determine, (a) the chief State school officer (such as the State 
Superintendent of Public Instruction, Commissioner of Education, or 
similar officer), or (b) a board of education controlling the State 
department of education.
    State food distribution advisory council means a group which meets 
to advise the State educational agency and the State distributing agency 
with respect to the needs of schools participating in the Program 
concerning the manner of selection and distribution of commodities.
    Subsidized lunch (paid lunch) means a lunch served to children who 
are either not eligible for or elect not to receive the free or reduced 
price benefits offered under 7 CFR part 245. The Department subsidizes 
each paid lunch with both general cash assistance and donated foods. 
Although a paid lunch student pays for a large portion of his or her 
lunch, the Department's subsidy accounts for a significant portion of 
the cost of that lunch.

[53 FR 29147, Aug. 2, 1988, as amended at 54 FR 12580, Mar. 28, 1989; 56 
FR 32939, July 17, 1991; 58 FR 42487, Aug. 10, 1993; 60 FR 31207, June 
13, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 210.3  Administration.

    (a) FCS. FCS will act on behalf of the Department in the 
administration of the Program. Within FCS, the CND will be responsible 
for Program administration.
    (b) States. Within the States, the responsibility for the 
administration of the Program in schools, as defined in Sec. 210.2, 
shall be in the State educational agency. If the State educational 
agency is unable to administer the Program in public or private 
nonprofit residential child care institutions or nonprofit private 
schools, then Program administration for such schools may be assumed by 
FCSRO as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, or such other agency 
of the State as has been designated by the Governor or other appropriate 
executive or legislative authority of the State and approved by the 
Department to administer such schools. Each State agency desiring to 
administer the Program shall enter into a written agreement with the 
Department for the administration of the Program in accordance with the 
applicable requirements of this part; part 235; part 245; parts 15, 15a, 
15b, and 3015 of Departmental regulations; and FCS instructions.
    (c) FCSRO. The FCSRO will administer the Program in nonprofit 
private schools or public or nonprofit private residential child care 
institutions if the State agency is prohibited by law from disbursing 
Federal funds paid to such schools. In addition, the FCSRO will continue 
to administer the Program in those States in which nonprofit private 
schools or public or nonprofit private residential child care 
institutions have been under continuous FCS administration since October 
1, 1980, unless the administration of the Program in such schools is 
assumed by the State. The FCSRO will, in each State in which it 
administers the Program, assume all responsibilities of a State agency 
as set forth in this part

[[Page 12]]

and part 245 of this chapter as appropriate. References in this part to 
``State agency'' include FCSRO, as applicable, when it is the agency 
administering the Program.
    (d) School food authorities. The school food authority shall be 
responsible for the administration of the Program in schools. State 
agencies shall ensure that school food authorities administer the 
Program in accordance with the applicable requirements of this part; 
part 245; parts 15, 15a, 15b, and 3015 of Departmental regulations; and 
FCS instructions.


<R04>
 Subpart B--Reimbursement Process for States and School Food Authorities


<R05>
Sec. 210.4  Cash and donated food assistance to States.

    (a) General. To the extent funds are available, FCS will make cash 
assistance available in accordance with the provisions of this section 
to each State agency for lunches and meal supplements served to children 
under the National School Lunch and Commodity School Programs. To the 
extent donated foods are available, FCS will provide donated food 
assistance to distributing agencies for each lunch served in accordance 
with the provisions of this part and part 250 of this chapter.
    (b) Assistance for the National School Lunch Program. The Secretary 
will make cash and/or donated food assistance available to each State 
agency and distributing agency, as appropriate, administering the 
National School Lunch Program, as follows:
    (1) Cash assistance for lunches: Cash assistance payments are 
composed of a general cash assistance payment, authorized under section 
4 of the Act, and a special cash assistance payment, authorized under 
section 11 of the Act. General cash assistance is provided to each State 
agency for all lunches served to children in accordance with the 
provisions of the National School Lunch Program. Special cash assistance 
is provided to each State agency for lunches served under the National 
School Lunch Program to children determined eligible for free or reduced 
price lunches in accordance with part 245 of this chapter. The total 
general cash assistance paid to each State for any fiscal year shall not 
exceed the lesser of amounts reported to FCS as reimbursed to school 
food authorities in accordance with Sec. 210.5(d)(3) or the total 
calculated by multiplying the number of lunches reported in accordance 
with Sec. 210.5(d)(1) for each month of service during the fiscal year, 
by the applicable national average payment rate prescribed by FCS. The 
total special assistance paid to each State for any fiscal year shall 
not exceed the lesser of amounts reported to FCS as reimbursed to school 
food authorities in accordance with Sec. 210.5(d)(3) or the total 
calculated by multiplying the number of free and reduced price lunches 
reported in accordance with Sec. 210.5(d)(1) for each month of service 
during the fiscal year by the applicable national average payment rate 
prescribed by FCS. In accordance with section 11 of the Act, FCS will 
prescribe annual adjustments to the per meal national average payment 
rate (general cash assistance) and the special assistance national 
average payment rates (special cash assistance) which are effective on 
July 1 of each year. These adjustments, which reflect changes in the 
food away from home series of the Consumer Price Index for all Urban 
Consumers, are annually announced by Notice in July of each year in the 
Federal Register. FCS will also establish maximum per meal rates of 
reimbursement within which a State may vary reimbursement rates to 
school food authorities. These maximum rates of reimbursement are 
established at the same time and announced in the same Notice as the 
national average payment rates.
    (2) Donated food assistance. For each school year, FCS will provide 
distributing agencies with donated foods for lunches served under the 
National School Lunch Program as provided under part 250 of this 
chapter. The per lunch value of donated food assistance is adjusted by 
the Secretary annually to reflect changes as required under section 6 of 
the Act. These adjustments, which reflect changes in the Price Index for 
Foods Used in Schools and Institutions, are effective on July 1

[[Page 13]]

of each year and are announced by Notice in the Federal Register in July 
of each year.
    (3) Cash assistance for meal supplements. For those eligible schools 
(as defined in Sec. 210.10(n)(1) or Sec. 210.10a(j)(1), whichever is 
applicable) operating afterschool care programs and electing to serve 
meal supplements to enrolled children, funds shall be made available to 
each State agency, each school year in an amount no less than the sum of 
the products obtained by multiplying:
    (i) The number of meal supplements served in the afterschool care 
program within the State to children from families that do not satisfy 
the income standards for free and reduced price school meals by 2.75 
cents;
    (ii) The number of meal supplements served in the afterschool care 
program within the State to children from families that satisfy the 
income standard for free school meals by 30 cents;
    (iii) The number of meal supplements served in the afterschool care 
program within the State to children from families that satisfy the 
income standard for reduced price school meals by 15 cents.
    (4) The rates in paragraph (b)(3) are the base rates established in 
August 1981 for the CACFP. FCS shall prescribe annual adjustments to 
these rates in the same Notice as the National Average Payment Rates for 
lunches. These adjustments shall ensure that the reimbursement rates for 
meal supplements served under this part are the same as those 
implemented for meal supplements in the CACFP.
    (c)  Assistance for the Commodity School Program. FCS will make 
special cash assistance available to each State agency for lunches 
served in commodity schools in the same manner as special cash 
assistance is provided in the National School Lunch Program. Payment of 
such amounts to State agencies is subject to the reporting requirements 
contained in Sec. 210.5(d). FCS will provide donated food assistance in 
accordance with part 250 of this chapter. Of the total value of donated 
food assistance to which it is entitled, the school food authority may 
elect to receive cash payments of up to 5 cents per lunch served in its 
commodity school(s) for donated foods processing and handling expenses. 
Such expenses include any expenses incurred by or on behalf of a 
commodity school for processing or other aspects of the preparation, 
delivery, and storage of donated foods. The school food authority may 
have all or part of these cash payments retained by the State agency for 
use on its behalf for processing and handling expenses by the State 
agency or it may authorize the State agency to transfer to the 
distributing agency all or any part of these payments for use on its 
behalf for these expenses. Payment of such amounts to State agencies is 
subject to the reporting requirements contained in Sec. 210.5(d). The 
total value of donated food assistance is calculated on a school year 
basis by adding:
    (1) The applicable national average payment rate (general cash 
assistance) prescribed by the Secretary for the period of July 1 through 
June 30 multiplied by the total number of lunches served during the 
school year under the Commodity School Program; and
    (2) The national per lunch average value of donated foods prescribed 
by the Secretary for the period of July 1 through June 30 multiplied by 
the total number of lunches served during the school year under the 
Commodity School Program.

[53 FR 29147, Aug. 2, 1988, as amended at 58 FR 42487, Aug. 10, 1993; 60 
FR 31207, June 13, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 210.5  Payment process to States.

    (a) Grant award. FCS will specify the terms and conditions of the 
State agency's grant in a grant award document and will generally make 
payments available by means of a Letter of Credit issued in favor of the 
State agency. The State agency shall obtain funds for reimbursement to 
participating school food authorities through procedures established by 
FCS in accordance with 7 CFR part 3015. State agencies shall limit 
requests for funds to such times and amounts as will permit prompt 
payment of claims or authorized advances. The State agency shall 
disburse funds received from such requests without delay for the purpose 
for which drawn. FCS may, at its option, reimburse a State agency by 
Treasury Check. FCS will pay by

[[Page 14]]

Treasury Check with funds available in settlement of a valid claim if 
payment for that claim cannot be made within the grant closeout period 
specified in paragraph (d) of this section.
    (b) Cash-in-lieu of donated foods. All Federal funds to be paid to 
any State in place of donated foods will be made available as provided 
in part 240 of this chapter.
    (c) Recovery of funds. FCS will recover any Federal funds made 
available to the State agency under this part which are in excess of 
obligations reported at the end of each fiscal year in accordance with 
the reconciliation procedures specified in paragraph (d) of this 
section. Such recoveries shall be reflected by a related adjustment in 
the State agency's Letter of Credit.
    (d) Substantiation and reconciliation process. Each State agency 
shall maintain Program records as necessary to support the reimbursement 
payments made to school food authorities under Sec. 210.7 and Sec. 210.8 
and the reports submitted to FCS under this paragraph. The State agency 
shall ensure such records are retained for a period of 3 years or as 
otherwise specified in Sec. 210.23(c).
    (1) Monthly report. Each State agency shall submit a final Report of 
School Program Operations (FCS-10) to FCS for each month. The final 
reports shall be limited to claims submitted in accordance with 
Sec. 210.8 of this part. For the month of October, the final report 
shall include the total number of children approved for free lunches, 
the total number of children approved for reduced price lunches, and the 
total number of children enrolled in participating public schools, 
private schools, and residential child care institutions, respectively, 
as of the last day of operation in October. The final reports shall be 
postmarked and/or submitted no later than 90 days following the last day 
of the month covered by the report. States shall not receive Program 
funds for any month for which the final report is not submitted within 
this time limit unless FCS grants an exception. Upward adjustments to a 
State's report shall not be made after 90 days from the month covered by 
the report unless authorized by FCS. Downward adjustments to a State's 
report shall always be made regardless of when it is determined that 
such adjustments are necessary. FCS authorization is not required for 
downward adjustments. Any adjustments to a State's report shall be 
reported to FCS in accordance with procedures established by FCS.
    (2) Quarterly report. Each State agency shall also submit to FCS a 
quarterly Financial Status Report (SF-269) on the use of Program funds. 
Such reports shall be postmarked and/or submitted no later than 30 days 
after the end of each fiscal year quarter.
    (3) End of year report. Each State agency shall submit a final 
Financial Status Report (SF-269) for each fiscal year. This final fiscal 
year grant closeout report shall be postmarked and/or submitted to FCS 
within 120 days after the end of each fiscal year or part thereof that 
the State agency administered the Program. Obligations shall be reported 
only for the fiscal year in which they occur. FCS will not be 
responsible for reimbursing Program obligations reported later than 120 
days after the close of the fiscal year in which they were incurred. 
Grant closeout procedures are to be carried out in accordance with 7 CFR 
part 3015.

[53 FR 29147, Aug. 2, 1988, as amended at 54 FR 12580, Mar. 28, 1989; 56 
FR 32939, July 17, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 210.6  Use of Federal funds.

    General. State agencies shall use Federal funds made available under 
the Program to reimburse or make advance payments to school food 
authorities in connection with lunches and meal supplements served in 
accordance with the provisions of this part; except that, with the 
approval of FCS, any State agency may reserve an amount up to one 
percent of the funds earned in any fiscal year under this part for use 
in carrying out special developmental projects. Advance payments to 
school food authorities may be made at such times and in such amounts as 
are necessary to meet the current fiscal obligations. All Federal funds 
paid to any State in place of donated foods shall be used as provided in 
part 240 of this chapter.

[53 FR 29147, Aug. 2, 1988, as amended at 58 FR 42487, Aug. 10, 1993]

[[Page 15]]


<R05>
Sec. 210.7  Reimbursement for school food authorities.

    (a) General. Reimbursement payments to finance nonprofit school food 
service operations shall be made only to school food authorities 
operating under a written agreement with the State agency. Subject to 
the provisions of Sec. 210.8(c), such payments may be made for lunches 
and meal supplements served in accordance with provisions of this part 
and part 245 in the calendar month preceding the calendar month in which 
the agreement is executed. These reimbursement payments include general 
cash assistance for all lunches served to children under the National 
School Lunch Program and special cash assistance payments for free or 
reduced price lunches served to children determined eligible for such 
benefits under the National School Lunch and Commodity School Programs. 
Reimbursement payments shall also be made for meal supplements served to 
eligible children in afterschool care programs in accordance with the 
rates established in Sec. 210.4(b)(3). Approval shall be in accordance 
with part 245 of this chapter.
    (b) Assignment of rates. At the beginning of each school year, State 
agencies shall establish the per meal rates of reimbursement for school 
food authorities participating in the Program. These rates of 
reimbursement may be assigned at levels based on financial need; except 
that, the rates are not to exceed the maximum rates of reimbursement 
established by the Secretary under Sec. 210.4(b) and are to permit 
reimbursement for the total number of lunches in the State from funds 
available under Sec. 210.4. Within each school food authority, the State 
agency shall assign the same rate of reimbursement from general cash 
assistance funds for all lunches served to children under the Program. 
Assigned rates of reimbursement may be changed at any time by the State 
agency, provided that notice of any change is given to the school food 
authority. The total general and special cash assistance reimbursement 
paid to any school food authority for lunches served to children during 
the school year are not to exceed the sum of the products obtained by 
multiplying the total reported number of lunches, by type, served to 
eligible children during the school year by the applicable maximum per 
lunch reimbursements prescribed for the school year for each type of 
lunch.
    (c) Reimbursement limitations. To be entitled to reimbursement under 
this part, each school food authority shall ensure that Claims for 
Reimbursement are limited to the number of free, reduced price and paid 
lunches and meal supplements that are served to children eligible for 
free, reduced price and paid lunches and meal supplements, respectively, 
for each day of operation.
    (1) Lunch count system. To ensure that the Claim for Reimbursement 
accurately reflects the number of lunches and meal supplements served to 
eligible children, the school food authority shall, at a minimum:
    (i) Correctly approve each child's eligibility for free and reduced 
price lunches and meal supplements based on the requirements prescribed 
under 7 CFR part 245;
    (ii) Maintain a system to issue benefits and to update the 
eligibility of children approved for free or reduced price lunches and 
meal supplements. The system shall:
    (A) Accurately reflect eligibility status as well as changes in 
eligibility made after the initial approval process due to verification 
findings, transfers, reported changes in income or household size, etc.; 
and
    (B) Make the appropriate changes in eligibility after the initial 
approval process on a timely basis so that the mechanism the school food 
authority uses to identify currently eligible children provides a 
current and accurate representation of eligible children. Changes in 
eligibility which result in increased benefit levels shall be made as 
soon as possible but no later than 3 operating days of the date the 
school food authority makes the final decision on a child's eligibility 
status. Changes in eligibility which result in decreased benefit levels 
shall be made as soon as possible but no later than 10 operating days of 
the date the school food authority makes the final decision on the 
child's eligibility status.
    (iii) Base Claims for Reimbursement on lunch counts, taken daily at 
the

[[Page 16]]

point of service, which correctly identify the number of free, reduced 
price and paid lunches served to eligible children;
    (iv) Correctly record, consolidate and report those lunch and 
supplement counts on the Claim for Reimbursement; and
    (v) Ensure that Claims for Reimbursement do not request payment for 
any excess lunches produced, as prohibited in Sec. 210.10(a)(2) or 
Sec. 210.10a(b), whichever is applicable, or non-Program lunches (i.e., 
a la carte or adult lunches) or for more than one meal supplement per 
child per day.
    (2) Point of service alternatives.
    (i) State agencies may authorize alternatives to the point of 
service lunch counts provided that such alternatives result in accurate, 
reliable counts of the number of free, reduced price and paid lunches 
served, respectively, for each serving day. State agencies are 
encouraged to issue guidance which clearly identifies acceptable point 
of service alternatives and instructions for proper implementation. 
School food authorities may select one of the State agency approved 
alternatives without prior approval.
    (ii) In addition, on a case-by-case basis, State agencies may 
authorize school food authorities to use other alternatives to the point 
of service lunch count; provided that such alternatives result in an 
accurate and reliable lunch count system. Any request to use an 
alternative lunch counting method which has not been previously 
authorized under paragraph (2)(i) is to be submitted in writing to the 
State agency for approval. Such request shall provide detail sufficient 
for the State agency to assess whether the proposed alternative would 
provide an accurate and reliable count of the number of lunches, by 
type, served each day to eligible children. The details of each approved 
alternative shall be maintained on file at the State agency for review 
by FCS.
    (d) The State agency shall reimburse the school food authority for 
meal supplements served in eligible schools (as defined in 
Sec. 210.10(n)(1) or Sec. 210.10a(j)(1), whichever is applicable) 
operating afterschool care programs under the NSLP in accordance with 
the rates established in Sec. 210.4(b).

[53 FR 29147, Aug. 2, 1988, as amended at 54 FR 12581, Mar. 28, 1989; 56 
FR 32939, July 17, 1991; 58 FR 42487, Aug. 10, 1993; 60 FR 31207, June 
13, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 210.8  Claims for reimbursement.

    (a) Internal controls. The school food authority shall establish 
internal controls which ensure the accuracy of lunch counts prior to the 
submission of the monthly Claim for Reimbursement. At a minimum, these 
internal controls shall include: an on-site review of the lunch counting 
and claiming system employed by each school within the jurisdiction of 
the school food authority; comparisons of daily free, reduced price and 
paid lunch counts against data which will assist in the identification 
of lunch counts in excess of the number of free, reduced price and paid 
lunches served each day to children eligible for such lunches; and a 
system for following up on those lunch counts which suggest the 
likelihood of lunch counting problems.
    (1) On-site reviews. Every school year, each school food authority 
with more than one school shall perform no less than one on-site review 
of the lunch counting and claiming system employed by each school under 
its jurisdiction. The on-site review shall take place prior to February 
1 of each school year. Further, if the review discloses problems with a 
school's meal counting or claiming procedures, the school food authority 
shall: ensure that the school implements corrective action; and, within 
45 days of the review, conducts a follow-up on-site review to determine 
that the corrective action resolved the problems. Each on-site review 
shall ensure that the school's claim is based on the counting system 
authorized by the State agency under Sec. 210.7(c) of this part and that 
the counting system, as implemented, yields the actual number of 
reimbursable free, reduced price and paid lunches, respectively, served 
for each day of operation.
    (2) School food authority claims review process. Prior to the 
submission of a monthly Claim for Reimbursement, each school food 
authority shall review the lunch count data for each school

[[Page 17]]

under its jurisdiction to ensure the accuracy of the monthly Claim for 
Reimbursement. The objective of this review is to ensure that monthly 
claims include only the number of free, reduced price and paid lunches 
served on any day of operation to children currently eligible for such 
lunches.
    (i) Any school food authority that was found by its most recent 
administrative review conducted in accordance with Sec. 210.18, to have 
no meal counting and claiming violations may:
    (A) Develop internal control procedures that ensure accurate meal 
counts. The school food authority shall submit any internal controls 
developed in accordance with this paragraph to the State agency for 
approval and, in the absence of specific disapproval from the State 
agency, shall implement such internal controls. The State agency shall 
establish procedures to promptly notify school food authorities of any 
modifications needed to their proposed internal controls or of denial of 
unacceptable submissions. If the State agency disapproves the proposed 
internal controls of any school food authority, it reserves the right to 
require the school food authority to comply with the provisions of 
paragraph (a)(3) of this section; or
    (B) Comply with the requirements of paragraph (a)(3) of this 
section.
    (ii) Any school food authority that was identified in the most 
recent administrative review conducted in accordance with Sec. 210.18, 
or in any other oversight activity, as having meal counting and claiming 
violations shall comply with the requirements in paragraph (a)(3) of 
this section.
    (3) Edit checks. (i) The following procedure shall be followed for 
school food authorities identified in paragraph (a)(2)(ii) of this 
section, by other school food authorities at State agency option, or, at 
their own option, by school food authorities identified in paragraph 
(a)(2)(i) of this section: the school food authority shall compare each 
school's daily counts of free, reduced price and paid lunches against 
the product of the number of children in that school currently eligible 
for free, reduced price and paid lunches, respectively, times an 
attendance factor.
    (ii) School food authorities that are identified in subsequent 
administrative reviews conducted in accordance with Sec. 210.18 as not 
having meal counting and claiming violations and that are correctly 
complying with the procedures in paragraph (a)(3)(i) of this section 
have the option of developing internal controls in accordance with 
paragraph (a)(2)(i) of this section.
    (4) Follow-up activity. The school food authority shall promptly 
follow-up through phone contact, on-site visits or other means when the 
internal controls used by schools in accordance with paragraph (a)(2)(i) 
of this section or the claims review process used by schools in 
accordance with paragraphs (a)(2)(ii) and (a)(3) of this section suggest 
the likelihood of lunch count problems. When problems or errors are 
identified, the lunch counts shall be corrected prior to submission of 
the monthly Claim for Reimbursement. Improvements to the lunch count 
system shall also be made to ensure that the lunch counting system 
consistently results in lunch counts of the actual number of 
reimbursable free, reduced price and paid lunches served for each day of 
operation.
    (5) Recordkeeping. School food authorities shall maintain on file, 
each month's Claim for Reimbursement and all data used in the claims 
review process, by school. Records shall be retained as specified in 
Sec. 210.23(c) of this part. School food authorities shall make this 
information available to the Department and the State agency upon 
request.
    (b) Monthly claims. To be entitled to reimbursement under this part, 
each school food authority shall submit to the State agency, a monthly 
Claim for Reimbursement, as described in paragraph (c) of this section.
    (1) Submission timeframes. A final Claim for Reimbursement shall be 
postmarked or submitted to the State agency not later than 60 days 
following the last day of the full month covered by the claim. State 
agencies may establish shorter deadlines at their discretion. Claims not 
postmarked and/or submitted within 60 days shall not be paid with 
Program funds unless otherwise authorized by FCS.

[[Page 18]]

    (2) State agency claims review process. The State agency shall 
review each school food authority's Claim for Reimbursement, on a 
monthly basis, in an effort to ensure that monthly claims are limited to 
the number of free and reduced price lunches served, by type, to 
eligible children.
    (i) The State agency shall, at a minimum, compare the number of free 
and reduced price lunches claimed to the number of children approved for 
free and reduced price lunches enrolled in the school food authority for 
the month of October times the days of operation times the attendance 
factor employed by the school food authority in accordance with 
paragraph (a)(3) of this section or the internal controls used by 
schools in accordance with paragraph (a)(2)(i) of this section. At its 
discretion, the State agency may conduct this comparison against data 
which reflects the number of children approved for free and reduced 
price lunches for a more current month(s) as collected pursuant to 
paragraph (c)(2) of this section.
    (ii) In lieu of conducting the claims review specified in paragraph 
(b)(2)(i) of this section, the State agency may conduct alternative 
analyses for those Claims for Reimbursement submitted by residential 
child care institutions. Such alternatives analyses shall meet the 
objective of ensuring that the monthly Claims for Reimbursement are 
limited to the numbers of free and reduced price lunches served, by 
type, to eligible children.
    (3) Follow-up activity. The State agency shall promptly follow-up 
through phone contact, on-site visits, or other means when the claims 
review process suggests the likelihood of lunch count problems.
    (4) Corrective action. The State agency shall promptly take 
corrective action with respect to any Claim for Reimbursement which 
includes more than the number of lunches served, by type, to eligible 
children. In taking corrective action, State agencies may make 
adjustments on claims filed within the 60-day deadline if such 
adjustments are completed within 90 days of the last day of the claim 
month and are reflected in the final Report of School Program Operations 
(FCS-10) for the claim month required under Sec. 210.5(d) of this part. 
Upward adjustments in Program funds claimed which are not reflected in 
the final FCS-10 for the claim month shall not be made unless authorized 
by FCS. Except that, upward adjustments for the current and prior fiscal 
years resulting from any review or audit may be made, at the discretion 
of the State agency. Downward adjustments in amounts claimed shall 
always be made, without FCS authorization, regardless of when it is 
determined that such adjustments are necessary.
    (c) Content of claim. The Claim for Reimbursement shall include data 
in sufficient detail to justify the reimbursement claimed and to enable 
the State agency to provide the Report of School Program Operations 
required under Sec. 210.5(d) of this part. Such data shall include, at a 
minimum, the number of free, reduced price and paid lunches and meal 
supplements served to eligible children. The claim shall be signed by a 
school food authority official.
    (1) Consolidated claim. The State agency may authorize a school food 
authority to submit a consolidated Claim for Reimbursement for all 
schools under its jurisdiction, provided that, the data on each school's 
operations required in this section are maintained on file at the local 
office of the school food authority and the claim separates consolidated 
data for commodity schools from data for other schools. Unless otherwise 
approved by FCS, the Claim for Reimbursement for any month shall include 
only lunches and meal supplements served in that month except if the 
first or last month of Program operations for any school year contains 
10 operating days or less, such month may be combined with the Claim for 
Reimbursement for the appropriate adjacent month. However, Claims for 
Reimbursement may not combine operations occurring in two fiscal years.
    (2) October data. For the month of October, the State agency shall 
also obtain, either through the Claim for Reimbursement or other means, 
the total number of children approved for free lunches and meal 
supplements, the total number of children approved for

[[Page 19]]

reduced price lunches and meal supplements, and the total number of 
children enrolled in the school food authority as of the last day of 
operation in October. The school food authority shall submit this data 
to the State agency no later than December 31 of each year. State 
agencies may establish shorter deadlines at their discretion. In 
addition, the State agency may require school food authorities to 
provide this data for a more current month if for use in the State 
agency claims review process under paragraph (c)(2) of this section.
    (d) Advance funds. The State agency may advance funds available for 
the Program to a school food authority in an amount equal to the amount 
of reimbursement estimated to be needed for one month's operation. 
Following the receipt of claims, the State agency shall make 
adjustments, as necessary, to ensure that the total amount of payments 
received by the school food authority for the fiscal year does not 
exceed an amount equal to the number of lunches and meal supplements by 
reimbursement type served to children times the respective payment rates 
assigned by the State in accordance with Sec. 210.7(b). The State agency 
shall recover advances of funds to any school food authority failing to 
comply with the 60-day claim submission requirements in paragraph (b) of 
this section.

[53 FR 29147, Aug. 2, 1988, as amended at 54 FR 12581, Mar. 28, 1989; 56 
FR 32940, July 17, 1991; 58 FR 42487, Aug. 10, 1993; 60 FR 31207, June 
13, 1995]


<R04>
     Subpart C--Requirements for School Food Authority Participation


<R05>
Sec. 210.9  Agreement with State agency.

    (a) Application. An official of a school food authority shall make 
written application to the State agency for any school in which it 
desires to operate the Program. Applications shall provide the State 
agency with sufficient information to determine eligibility. The school 
food authority shall also submit for approval a Free and Reduced Price 
Policy Statement in accordance with part 245 of this chapter.
    (b) Annual agreement. The school food authority shall annually enter 
into a written agreement with the State agency. The State agency may 
allow school food authorities to extend by amendment a previous year's 
agreement in lieu of taking a new agreement annually provided that each 
year a current written agreement is on file at the State agency. The 
agreement shall contain a statement to the effect that the ``School Food 
Authority and participating schools under its jurisdiction, shall comply 
with all provisions of 7 CFR parts 210 and 245.'' This agreement shall 
provide that each school food authority shall, with respect to 
participating schools under its jurisdiction:
    (1) Maintain a nonprofit school food service and observe the 
limitations on the use of nonprofit school food service revenues set 
forth in Sec. 210.14(a) and the limitations on any competitive school 
food service as set forth in Sec. 210.11(b);
    (2) Limit its net cash resources to an amount that does not exceed 3 
months average expenditures for its nonprofit school food service or 
such other amount as may be approved in accordance with Sec. 210.19(a);
    (3) Maintain a financial management system as prescribed under 
Sec. 210.14(c);
    (4) Comply with the requirements of the Department's regulations 
regarding financial management (7 CFR part 3015);
    (5) Serve lunches, during the lunch period, which meet the minimum 
requirements prescribed in Sec. 210.10 or 210.10a, whichever is 
applicable;
    (6) Price the lunch as a unit;
    (7) Serve lunches free or at a reduced price to all children who are 
determined by the school food authority to be eligible for such meals 
under 7 CFR part 245;
    (8) Claim reimbursement at the assigned rates only for reimbursable 
free, reduced price and paid lunches served to eligible children in 
accordance with 7 CFR part 210. Agree that the school food authority 
official signing the claim shall be responsible for reviewing and 
analyzing meal counts to ensure accuracy as specified in Sec. 210.8 
governing claims for reimbursement. Acknowledge that failure to submit 
accurate claims will result in the recovery of an overclaim and may 
result in the withholding of payments, suspension or

[[Page 20]]

termination of the program as specified in Sec. 210.25. Acknowledge that 
if failure to submit accurate claims reflects embezzlement, willful 
misapplication of funds, theft, or fraudulent activity, the penalties 
specified in Sec. 210.26 shall apply;
    (9) Count the number of free, reduced price and paid reimbursable 
meals served to eligible children at the point of service, or through 
another counting system if approved by the State agency;
    (10) Submit Claims for Reimbursement in accordance with Sec. 210.8;
    (11) Comply with the requirements of the Department's regulations 
regarding nondiscrimination (7 CFR parts 15, 15a, 15b);
    (12) Make no discrimination against any child because of his or her 
eligibility for free or reduced price meals in accordance with the 
approved Free and Reduced Price Policy Statement;
    (13) Enter into an agreement to receive donated foods as required by 
7 CFR part 250;
    (14) Maintain, in the storage, preparation and service of food, 
proper sanitation and health standards in conformance with all 
applicable State and local laws and regulations;
    (15) Accept and use, in as large quantities as may be efficiently 
utilized in its nonprofit school food service, such foods as may be 
offered as a donation by the Department;
    (16) Maintain necessary facilities for storing, preparing and 
serving food;
    (17) Upon request, make all accounts and records pertaining to its 
school food service available to the State agency and to FCS, for audit 
or review, at a reasonable time and place. Such records shall be 
retained for a period of 3 years after the date of the final Claim for 
Reimbursement for the fiscal year to which they pertain, except that if 
audit findings have not been resolved, the records shall be retained 
beyond the 3 year period as long as required for resolution of the 
issues raised by the audit;
    (18) Maintain files of currently approved and denied free and 
reduced price applications, respectively, and the names of children 
approved for free lunches based on documentation certifying that the 
child is included in a household approved to receive benefits under the 
Food Stamp or the Aid to Families with Dependent Children Programs. If 
the applications and/or documentation are maintained at the school food 
authority level, they shall be readily retrievable by school;
    (19) Retain the individual applications for free and reduced price 
lunches and meal supplements submitted by families for a period of 3 
years after the end of the fiscal year to which they pertain or as 
otherwise specified under paragraph (b)(17) of this section.
    (c) Afterschool care requirements. Those school food authorities 
with eligible schools (as defined in Sec. 210.10(n)(1) or 
Sec. 210.10a(j)(1), whichever is applicable) that elect to serve meal 
supplements during afterschool care programs, shall agree to:
    (1) Serve meal supplements which meet the minimum requirements 
prescribed in Sec. 210.10 or Sec. 210.10a, whichever is applicable;
    (2) Price the meal supplement as a unit;
    (3) Serve meal supplements free or at a reduced price to all 
children who are determined by the school food authority to be eligible 
for free or reduced price school meals under 7 CFR part 245;
    (4) If charging for meals, the charge for a reduced price meal 
supplement shall not exceed 15 cents;
    (5) Claim reimbursement at the assigned rates only for meal 
supplements served in accordance with the agreement;
    (6) Claim reimbursement for no more than one meal supplement per 
child per day;
    (7) Review each afterschool care program two times a year; the first 
review shall be made during the first four weeks that the school is in 
operation each school year, except that an afterschool care program 
operating year round shall be reviewed during the first four weeks of 
its initial year of operation, once more during its first year of 
operation, and twice each school year thereafter; and
    (8) Comply with all requirements of this part, except that, claims 
for reimbursement need not be based on ``point

[[Page 21]]

of service'' meal supplement counts (as required by Sec. 210.9(b)(9)).

[53 FR 29147, Aug. 2, 1988, as amended at 54 FR 12581, Mar. 28, 1989; 56 
FR 32941, July 17, 1991; 58 FR 42488, Aug. 10, 1993; 60 FR 31208, June 
13, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 210.10  Nutrition standards for lunches and menu planning methods.

    (a) General requirements for school lunches. (1) In order to qualify 
for reimbursement, all lunches served to children age 2 and older, as 
offered by participating schools, shall, at a minimum, meet the 
nutrition standards provided in paragraph (b) of this section and the 
appropriate level of calories and nutrients provided for in either 
paragraph (c) or paragraph (i)(1) of this section for nutrient standard 
menu planning and assisted nutrient standard menu planning or in 
paragraph (d) of this section for food-based menu planning, whichever is 
applicable. Compliance with the nutrition standards and the nutrient and 
calorie levels shall be determined by averaging lunches offered over a 
school week. Except as otherwise provided herein, school food 
authorities shall ensure that sufficient quantities of foods are planned 
and produced to meet, at a minimum, the nutrition standards in paragraph 
(b) of this section, the appropriate nutrient and calorie levels in 
paragraphs (c), (d), or (i)(1) of this section, whichever is applicable, 
and to either contain all the required food items in at least the 
amounts indicated in paragraph (k) of this section or to supply 
sufficient quantities of menu items and foods as provided in paragraphs 
(i) or (j) of this section.
    (2) School food authorities shall ensure that each lunch is priced 
as a unit and that lunches are planned and produced on the basis of 
participation trends, with the objective of providing one reimbursable 
lunch per child per day. Any excess lunches that are produced may be 
offered, but shall not be claimed for general or special cash assistance 
provided under Sec. 210.4. The component requirements for meal 
supplements served under the Child and Adult Care Food Program 
authorized under part 225 of this chapter shall also apply to meal 
supplements served by eligible school food authorities in afterschool 
care programs under the NSLP.
    (3) Production and menu records shall be maintained to demonstrate 
that the required number of food components and food items or menu items 
are offered on a given day. Production records shall include sufficient 
information to evaluate the menu's contribution to the requirements on 
nutrition standards in paragraph (b) of this section and the appropriate 
levels of nutrients and calories in paragraphs (c), (d) or (i)(1) of 
this section, whichever is applicable. If applicable, schools or school 
food authorities shall maintain nutritional analysis records to 
demonstrate that lunches meet, when averaged over each school week, the 
nutrition standards provided in paragraph (b) of this section and the 
nutrient and calorie levels for the appropriate age or grade group as 
provided for in paragraphs (c) or (i)(1) of this section, whichever is 
applicable.
    (b) Nutrition standards for reimbursable lunches. School food 
authorities shall ensure that participating schools provide nutritious 
and well-balanced meals to children. In addition, for children ages 2 
and above meals shall be provided based on the nutrition standards 
provided in this section.
    (1) Provision of one-third of the Recommended Dietary Allowances 
(RDA) of protein, calcium, iron, vitamin A and vitamin C to the 
applicable age or grade groups in accordance with the appropriate levels 
provided in paragraph (c), (d) or (i)(1) of this section, whichever is 
applicable;
    (2) Provision of the lunchtime energy allowances for children based 
on the appropriate age or grade groups in accordance with the levels 
provided in paragraphs (c), (d) or (i)(1) of this section, whichever is 
applicable;
    (3) The applicable recommendations of the 1990 Dietary Guidelines 
for Americans which are:
    (i) Eat a variety of foods;
    (ii) Limit total fat to 30 percent of calories;
    (iii) Limit saturated fat to less than 10 percent of calories;
    (iv) Choose a diet low in cholesterol;
    (v) Choose a diet with plenty of vegetables, fruits, and grain 
products; and

[[Page 22]]

    (vi) Use salt and sodium in moderation.
    (4) The following measures of compliance with the applicable 
recommendations of the 1990 Dietary Guidelines for Americans:
    (i) A limit on the percent of calories from total fat to 30 percent 
based on the actual number of calories offered;
    (ii) A limit on the percent of calories from saturated fat to less 
than 10 percent based on the actual number of calories offered;
    (iii) A reduction of the levels of sodium and cholesterol; and
    (iv) An increase in the level of dietary fiber.
    (5) School food authorities have three alternatives for menu 
planning in order to meet the requirements of this paragraph and the 
appropriate nutrient and calorie levels in paragraphs (c), (d) or (i)(1) 
of this section, whichever is applicable: nutrient standard menu 
planning as provided for in paragraph (i) of this section, assisted 
nutrient standard menu planning as provided for in paragraph (j) of this 
section, or food-based menu planning as provided for in paragraph (k) of 
this section. The actual minimum calorie levels vary depending upon the 
alternative followed due to differences in age/grade groupings of each 
alternative.
    (c) Nutrient levels for school lunches/nutrient analysis. (1) For 
the purposes of nutrient standard and assisted nutrient standard menu 
planning, as provided for in paragraphs (i) and (j), respectively, of 
this section, schools shall, at a minimum, provide calorie and nutrient 
levels for school lunches (offered over a school week) for the required 
grade groups specified in the chart following:

      Minimum Requirements for Nutrient Levels for School Lunches/Nutrient Analysis (School Week Averages)      
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                       Minimum requirements            Optional 
                                                             ---------------------------------------------------
               Nutrients and energy allowances                                           Grades  7-             
                                                               Preschool    Grades K-6       12       Grades K-3
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Energy allowance/calories...................................          517          664          825          633
Total fat (as a percent of actual total food energy)........        (\1\)        (\1\)        (\1\)        (\1\)
Saturated fat (as a percent of actual total food energy)....        (\2\)        (\2\)        (\2\)        (\2\)
RDA for protein (g).........................................            7           10           16            9
RDA for calcium (mg)........................................          267          286          400          267
RDA for iron (mg)...........................................          3.3          3.5          4.5          3.3
RDA for vitamin A (RE)......................................          150          224          300          200
RDA for vitamin C (mg)......................................           14           15           18           15
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Not to exceed 30 percent over a school week.                                                                
\2\ Less than 10 percent over a school week.                                                                    

    (2) At their option, schools may provide for the calorie and 
nutrient levels for school lunches (offered over a school week) for the 
age groups specified in the following chart or may develop their own age 
groups and their corresponding levels in accordance with paragraph 
(i)(1) of this section.

          Optional Minimum Nutrient Levels for School Lunches/Nutrient Analysis (School Week Averages)          
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                     Ages 14 and
               Nutrients and energy allowances                  Ages 3-6    Ages 7-10    Ages 11-13     above   
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Energy allowance/calories...................................          558          667          783          846
Total fat (as a percent of actual total food energy)........        (\1\)        (\1\)        (\1\)        (\1\)
Saturated fat (as a percent of actual total food energy)....        (\2\)        (\2\)        (\2\)        (\2\)
RDA for protein (g).........................................          7.3          9.3         15.0         16.7
RDA for calcium (mg)........................................          267          267          400          400
RDA for iron (mg)...........................................          3.3          3.3          4.5          4.5
RDA for vitamin A (RE)......................................          158          233          300          300
RDA for vitamin C (mg)......................................         14.6         15.0         16.7        19.2 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Not to exceed 30 percent over a school week.                                                                
\2\ Less than 10 percent over a school week.                                                                    


[[Page 23]]

    (d) Minimum nutrient levels for school lunches/food-based menu 
planning. For the purposes of food-based menu planning, as provided for 
in paragraph (k) of this section, the following chart provides the 
minimum levels, by grade group, for calorie and nutrient levels for 
school lunches offered over a school week:

           Minimum Nutrient Levels for School Lunches/Food-Based Menu Planning (School Week Averages)           
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                         Grades  7-   Grades K-3
                                                               Preschool   Grades  K-6       12         option  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Energy allowances (Calories)................................          517          664          825          633
Total fat (as a percentage of actual total food energy).....        (\1\)        (\1\)        (\1\)        (\1\)
Total saturated fat (as a percentage of actual total food                                                       
 energy)....................................................        (\2\)        (\2\)        (\2\)        (\2\)
Protein (g).................................................            7           10           16            9
Calcium (mg)................................................          267          286          400          267
Iron (mg)...................................................          3.3          3.5          4.5          3.3
Vitamin A (RE)..............................................          150          224          300          200
Vitamin C (mg)..............................................           14           15           18           15
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Not to exceed 30 percent over a school week.                                                                
\2\ Less than 10 percent over a school week.                                                                    

    (e) Choice. To provide variety and to encourage consumption and 
participation, schools should, whenever possible, offer a selection of 
menu items and foods from which children may make choices. When a school 
offers a selection of more than one type of lunch or when it offers a 
variety of menu items, foods or milk for choice within a reimbursable 
lunch, the school shall offer all children the same selection regardless 
of whether the children are eligible for free or reduced price lunches 
or pay the school food authority's designated full price. The school may 
establish different unit prices for each type of lunch offered provided 
that the benefits made available to children eligible for free or 
reduced price lunches are not affected.
    (f) Lunch period. At or about mid-day schools shall offer lunches 
which meet the requirements of this section during a period designated 
as the lunch period by the school food authority. Such lunch periods 
shall occur between 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m., unless otherwise exempted 
by FCS. With State agency approval, schools that serve children 1-5 
years old are encouraged to divide the service of the meal into two 
distinct service periods. Such schools may divide the quantities, and/or 
menu items, foods or food items offered between these service periods in 
any combination that they choose. Schools are also encouraged to provide 
an adequate number of lunch periods of sufficient length to ensure that 
all students have an opportunity to be served and have ample time to 
consume their meals.
    (g) Exceptions. Lunches claimed for reimbursement shall meet the 
nutrition requirements for reimbursable meals specified in this section. 
However, lunches served which accommodate the exceptions and variations 
authorized under this paragraph are also reimbursable. Exceptions and 
variations are restricted to the following:
    (1) Medical or dietary needs. Schools shall make substitutions in 
foods listed in this section for students who are considered to have a 
disability under 7 CFR part 15b and whose disability restricts their 
diet. Schools may also make substitutions for students who do not have a 
disability but who are unable to consume the regular lunch because of 
medical or other special dietary needs. Substitutions shall be made on a 
case by case basis only when supported by a statement of the need for 
substitutions that includes recommended alternate foods, unless 
otherwise exempted by FCS. Such statement shall, in the case of a 
student with a disability, be signed by a physician or, in the case of a 
student who is not disabled, by a recognized medical authority.
    (2) Ethnic, religious or economic variations. FCS encourages school 
food authorities to consider ethnic and religious preferences when 
planning and preparing meals. For the purposes of

[[Page 24]]

the food-based menu planning alternative as provided for in paragraph 
(k) of this section, FCS may approve variations in the food components 
of the lunch on an experimental or on a continuing basis in any school 
where there is evidence that such variations are nutritionally sound and 
are necessary to meet ethnic, religious, or economic needs.
    (3) Natural disaster. In the event of a natural disaster or other 
catastrophe, FCS may temporarily allow schools to serve lunches for 
reimbursement that do not meet the requirements of this section.
    (h) Nutrition disclosure. School food authorities are encouraged to 
make information available indicating efforts to meet the nutrition 
standards in paragraph (b) of this section.
    (i) Nutrient standard menu planning. (1) Adjusted nutrient levels. 
(i) At a minimum, schools with children age 2 that choose the nutrient 
standard menu planning alternative shall ensure that the nutrition 
standards in paragraph (b) and the required preschool level in paragraph 
(c)(1) of this section are met over a school week except that, such 
schools have the option of either using the nutrient and calorie levels 
for preschool children in paragraph (c)(2) of this section or developing 
separate nutrient and calorie levels for this age group. The methodology 
for determining such levels will be available in menu planning guidance 
material provided by FCS.
    (ii) At a minimum, schools shall offer meals to children based on 
the required grade groups in the table, Minimum Nutrient Levels for 
School Lunches/Nutrient Analysis, in paragraph (c)(1) of this section. 
However, schools may, at their option, offer meals to children using the 
age groups and their corresponding calorie and nutrient levels in 
paragraph (c)(2) of this section or, following guidance provided by FCS, 
develop their own age or grade groups and their corresponding nutrient 
and calorie levels. However, if only one age or grade is outside the 
established levels, schools may use the levels for the majority of 
children regardless of the option selected.
    (2) Contents of reimbursable meal and offer versus serve. (i) 
Minimum requirements. For the purposes of this menu planning 
alternative, a reimbursable lunch shall include a minimum of three menu 
items as defined in Sec. 210.2; one menu item shall be an entree and one 
shall be fluid milk as a beverage. An entree may be a combination of 
foods or a single food item that is offered as the main course. All menu 
items or foods offered as part of the reimbursable meal may be 
considered as contributing towards meeting the nutrition standards in 
paragraph (b) of this section and the appropriate nutrient and calorie 
levels in paragraph (c) or (i)(1) of this section, whichever is 
applicable, except for those foods that are considered foods of minimal 
nutritional value as provided for in Sec. 210.11(a)(2) which are not 
offered as part of a menu item in a reimbursable meal. Such reimbursable 
lunches, as offered, shall meet the established nutrition standards in 
paragraph (b) and the appropriate nutrient and calorie levels in 
paragraphs (c) or (i)(1) of this section, whichever is applicable, when 
averaged over a school week.
    (ii) Offer versus serve. Each participating school shall offer its 
students at least three menu items as required by paragraph (i)(2)(i) of 
this section. Under offer versus serve, senior high students must select 
at least two menu items and may decline a maximum of two menu items; one 
menu item selected must be an entree. At the discretion of the school 
food authority, students below the senior high level may also 
participate in offer versus serve. The price of a reimbursable lunch 
shall not be affected if a student declines a menu item or requests 
smaller portions. State educational agencies shall define ``senior 
high.''
    (3) Nutrient analysis under Nutrient Standard Menu Planning. School 
food authorities choosing the nutrient analysis alternative shall 
conduct nutrient analysis on all menu items or foods offered as part of 
the reimbursable meal. However, those foods that are considered as foods 
of minimal nutritional value as provided for in Sec. 210.11(a)(2) which 
are not offered as part of a menu item in a reimbursable meal shall not 
be included. Such analysis shall be over the course of each school week.

[[Page 25]]

    (4) The National Nutrient Database and software specifications. (i) 
Nutrient analysis shall be based on information provided in the National 
Nutrient Database for Child Nutrition Programs. This database shall be 
incorporated into software used to conduct nutrient analysis. Upon 
request, FCS will provide information about the database to software 
companies and others that wish to develop school food service software 
systems.
    (ii) Any software used to conduct nutrient analysis shall be 
evaluated by FCS or by an FCS designee beforehand and, as submitted, has 
been determined to meet the minimum requirements established by FCS. 
However, such review does not constitute endorsement by FCS or USDA. 
Such software shall provide the capability to perform all functions 
required after the basic data has been entered including calculation of 
weighted averages and the optional combining of analysis of the lunch 
and breakfast programs as provided in paragraph (i)(5) of this section.
    (5) Determination of weighted averages. (i) Menu items and foods 
offered as part of a reimbursable meal shall be analyzed based on 
portion sizes and projected serving amounts and shall be weighted based 
on their proportionate contribution to the meals. Therefore, in 
determining whether meals satisfy nutritional requirements, menu items 
or foods more frequently offered will be weighted more heavily than menu 
items or foods which are less frequently offered. Such weighting shall 
be done in accordance with guidance issued by FCS as well as that 
provided by the software used.
    (ii) An analysis of all menu items and foods offered in the menu 
over each school week shall be computed for calories and for each of the 
following nutrients: protein; vitamin A; vitamin C; iron; calcium; total 
fat; saturated fat; and sodium. The analysis shall also include the 
dietary components of cholesterol and dietary fiber.
    (iii) At its option, a school food authority may combine analysis of 
the National School Lunch and School Breakfast Programs. Such analysis 
shall be proportionate to the levels of participation in the two 
programs in accordance with guidance issued by FCS.
    (6) Comparing average nutrient levels. Once the appropriate 
procedures of paragraph (i)(5) of this section have been completed, the 
results shall be compared to the appropriate nutrient and calorie 
levels, by age/grade groups, in paragraph (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this 
section or to the levels developed in accordance with paragraph (i)(1) 
of this section, whichever is applicable, to determine the school week's 
average. In addition, comparisons shall be made to the nutrition 
standards provided in paragraph (b) of this section in order to 
determine the degree of conformity over the school week.
    (7) Adjustments based on students' selections. The results obtained 
under paragraph (i)(5) and (i)(6) of this section shall be used to 
adjust future menu cycles to accurately reflect production and the 
frequency with which menu items and foods are offered. Menus may require 
further analysis and comparison, depending on the results obtained in 
paragraph (i)(6) of this section, when production and selection patterns 
of students change. The school food authority may need to consider 
modifications to the menu items and foods offered based on student 
selections as well as modifications to recipes and other specifications 
to ensure that the nutrition standards provided in paragraph (b) of this 
section and paragraphs (c) or (i)(1) of this section, whichever is 
applicable, are met.
    (8) Standardized recipes. Under Nutrient Standard Menu Planning, 
standardized recipes shall be developed and followed. A standardized 
recipe is one that was tested to provide an established yield and 
quantity through the use of ingredients that remain constant in both 
measurement and preparation methods. USDA/FCS standardized recipes are 
included in the National Nutrient Database for the Child Nutrition 
Programs. In addition, local standardized recipes used by school food 
authorities shall be analyzed for their calories, nutrients and dietary 
components, as provided in paragraph (i)(5)(ii) of this section, and 
added to

[[Page 26]]

the local databases by school food authorities in accordance with 
guidance provided by FCS.
    (9) Processed foods. Unless already included in the National 
Nutrient Database, the calorie amounts, nutrients and dietary 
components, as provided in paragraph (i)(5)(ii) of this section, of 
purchased processed foods and menu items used by the school food 
authority shall be obtained by the school food authority or State agency 
and incorporated into the database at the local level in accordance with 
FCS guidance.
    (10) Menu substitutions. If the need for serving a substitute 
food(s) or menu item(s) occurs at least two weeks prior to serving the 
planned menu, the revised menu shall be reanalyzed based on the changes. 
If the need for serving a substitute food(s) or menu item(s) occurs two 
weeks or less prior to serving the planned menu, no reanalysis is 
required. However, to the extent possible, substitutions should be made 
using similar foods.
    (11) Compliance with the nutrition standards. If the analysis 
conducted in accordance with paragraphs (i)(1) through (i)(10) of this 
section shows that the menus offered are not meeting the nutrition 
standards in paragraph (b) of this section and the appropriate levels of 
nutrients and calories in paragraph (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section or 
the levels developed in accordance with paragraph (i)(1) of this 
section, whichever is applicable, actions, including technical 
assistance and training, shall be taken by the State agency, school food 
authority, or school, as appropriate, to ensure that the lunches offered 
to children comply with the nutrition standards established by paragraph 
(b) and the appropriate levels of nutrients and calories in paragraphs 
(c) or (i)(1) of this section, whichever is applicable.
    (12) Other programs. Any school food authority that operates the 
Summer Food Service Program authorized under part 225 of this chapter 
and/or the Child and Adult Care Food Program under part 226 of this 
chapter may, at its option and with State agency approval, prepare meals 
provided for those programs using the nutrient standard menu planning 
alternative, except for children under two years of age. For school food 
authorities providing meals for adults, FCS will provide guidance on the 
level of nutrients and calories needed. Meal supplements shall continue 
to be provided based on the appropriate program's meal pattern.
    (j) Assisted Nutrient Standard Menu Planning. (1) School food 
authorities without the capability to conduct Nutrient Standard Menu 
Planning, as provided in paragraph (i) of this section, may choose an 
alternative which uses menu cycles developed by other sources. Such 
sources may include, but are not limited to the State agency, other 
school food authorities, consultants, or food service management 
companies. This alternative is Assisted Nutrient Standard Menu Planning.
    (2) Assisted Nutrient Standard Menu Planning shall establish menu 
cycles that have been developed in accordance with paragraphs (i)(1) 
through (i)(10) of this section as well as local food preferences and 
local food service operations. These menu cycles shall incorporate the 
nutrition standards in paragraph (b) of this section and the appropriate 
nutrient and calorie levels in paragraphs (c) or (i)(1) of this section, 
whichever is applicable. In addition to the menu cycle, recipes, food 
product specifications and preparation techniques shall also be 
developed and provided by the entity furnishing Assisted Nutrient 
Standard Menu Planning to ensure that the menu items and foods offered 
conform to the nutrient analysis determinations of the menu cycle.
    (3) At the inception of any use of Assisted Nutrient Standard Menu 
Planning, the State agency shall approve the initial menu cycle, 
recipes, and other specifications to determine that all required 
elements for correct nutrient analysis are incorporated. The State 
agency shall also, upon request by the school food authority, provide 
assistance with implementation of the chosen system.
    (4) After initial service of the menu cycle under the Assisted 
Nutrient Standard Menu Planning, the nutrient analysis shall be 
reassessed and appropriate adjustments made in accordance with paragraph 
(i)(7) of this section.

[[Page 27]]

    (5) Under Assisted Nutrient Standard Menu Planning, the school food 
authority retains final responsibility for ensuring that all nutrition 
standards established in paragraph (b) and the appropriate nutrient and 
calorie levels in paragraphs (c) or (i)(1) of this section, whichever 
are applicable, are met.
    (6) If the analysis conducted in accordance with paragraphs (i)(1) 
through (i)(10) and paragraph (j)(4) of this section shows that the 
menus offered are not meeting the nutrition standards in paragraph (b) 
of this section and the appropriate nutrient and calorie levels in 
paragraphs (c) or (i)(1) of this section, whichever is applicable, 
actions, including technical assistance and training, shall be taken by 
the State agency, school food authority, or school, as appropriate, to 
ensure that the lunches offered to children comply with the nutrition 
standards established by paragraph (b) and the appropriate nutrient and 
calorie levels in paragraphs (c) or (i)(1) of this section, whichever is 
applicable.
    (7) Any school food authority that operates the Summer Food Service 
Program authorized under part 225 of this chapter and/or the Child and 
Adult Care Food Program under part 226 of this chapter may, at its 
option and with State agency approval, prepare meals provided for those 
programs using the assisted nutrient standard menu planning alternative, 
except for children under two years of age. For school food authorities 
providing meals for adults, FCS will provide guidance on the level of 
nutrients and calories needed. Meal supplements shall continue to be 
provided based on the appropriate program's meal pattern.
    (k) Food-based menu planning. (1) Menu planning alternative. School 
food authorities may choose to plan menus using the food-based menu 
planning alternative. Under the food-based menu planning alternative, 
specific food components in minimum quantities must be served as 
provided in paragraphs (k)(2) through (k)(5) of this section.
    (2) Minimum quantities. At a minimum, school food authorities 
choosing to plan menus using the food-based menu planning alternative 
shall offer all five required food items in the quantities provided in 
the following chart:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                 Minimum quantities required for                    Option for  
        Meal component         ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                    Ages 1-2        Preschool       Grades K-6      Grades 7-12      K-Grade 3  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Milk (as a beverage)..........  6 Ounces.......  6 Ounces.......  8 Ounces......  8 Ounces......  8 Ounces.     
Meat or Meat Alternate                                                                                          
 (quantity of the edible                                                                                        
 portion as served).                                                                                            
Lean meat, poultry or fish....  1 Oz...........  1\1/2\ Oz......  2 Oz..........  2 Oz..........  1\1/2\ Oz.    
Cheese........................  1 Oz...........  1\1/2\ Oz......  2 Oz..........  2 Oz..........  1\1/2\ Oz.    
Large egg.....................  \1/2\..........  \3/4\..........  1.............  1.............  \3/4\.        
Cooked dry beans or peas......  \1/4\ Cup......  \3/8\ Cup......  \1/2\ Cup.....  \1/2\ Cup.....  \3/8\ Cup.    
Peanut butter or other nut or   2 Tbsp.........  3 Tbsp.........  4 Tbsp........  4 Tbsp........  3 Tbsp.       
 seed butters.                                                                                                  
The following may be used to    \1/2\ oz.=50%..  \3/4\ Oz.=50%..  1 Oz.=50%.....  1 Oz.=50%.....  \3/4\ Oz.=50%.
 meet no more than 50% of the                                                                                   
 requirement and must be used                                                                                   
 in combination with any of                                                                                     
 the above: Peanuts, soynuts,                                                                                   
 tree nuts, or seeds, as                                                                                        
 listed in program guidance,                                                                                    
 or an equivalent quantity of                                                                                   
 any combination of the above                                                                                   
 meat/meat alternate (1 ounce                                                                                   
 of nuts/seeds=1 ounce of                                                                                       
 cooked lean meat, poultry or                                                                                   
 fish.).                                                                                                        
Vegetables/Fruits (2 or more    \1/2\ Cup......  \1/2\ Cup......  \3/4\ Cup plus  1 Cup.........  \3/4\ Cup.    
 servings of vegetables or                                         extra \1/2\                                  
 fruits or both).                                                  Cup over a                                   
                                                                   week \1\.                                    
Grains/Breads Must be enriched  5 servings per   8 servings per   12 servings     15 servings     10 servings   
 or whole grain. A serving is    week--minimum    week--minimum    per week--      per week--      per week--   
 a slice of bread or an          of \1/2\ per     of 1 per day     minimum of 1    minimum of 1    minimum of 1 
 equivalent serving of           day \1\.         \1\.             per day \1\     per day \1\     per day.\1\  
 biscuits, rolls, etc., or \1/                                     \2\.            \2\.            \2\          
 2\ cup of cooked rice,                                                                                         
 macaroni, noodles, other                                                                                       
 pasta products or cereal                                                                                       
 grains.                                                                                                        
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ For the purposes of this chart, a week equals five days.                                                    
\2\ Up to one grains/breads serving per day may be a dessert.                                                   


[[Page 28]]

    (3) Meat or meat alternate component. The quantity of meat or meat 
alternate shall be the quantity of the edible portion as served. When 
the school determines that the portion size of a meat alternate is 
excessive, it shall reduce the portion size of that particular meat 
alternate and supplement it with another meat/meat alternate to meet the 
full requirement. To be counted as meeting the requirement, the meat or 
meat alternate shall be served in a main dish or in a main dish and only 
one other of the items offered. The Department recommends that if 
schools do not offer children choices of meat or meat alternates each 
day, they serve no one meat alternate or form of meat (e.g., ground, 
diced, pieces) more than three times in a single week.
    (i) Vegetable protein products and enriched macaroni with fortified 
protein defined in appendix A of this part may be used to meet part of 
the meat or meat alternate requirement when used as specified in 
appendix A of this part. An enriched macaroni product with fortified 
protein as defined in appendix A of this part may be used as part of a 
meat alternate or as a grain/bread item, but not as both food components 
in the same meal.
    (ii) Nuts and seeds and their butters listed in program guidance are 
nutritionally comparable to meat or other meat alternates based on 
available nutritional data. Acorns, chestnuts, and coconuts shall not be 
used as meat alternates due to their low protein and iron content. Nut 
and seed meals or flours shall not be used as a meat alternate except as 
defined in this part under appendix A: Alternate Foods for Meals. Nuts 
or seeds may be used to meet no more than one-half of the meat/meat 
alternate requirement. Therefore, nuts and seeds must be used in the 
meal with another meat/meat alternate to fulfill the requirement.
    (4) Vegetables and fruits. Full strength vegetable or fruit juice 
may be counted to meet not more than one-half of the vegetable/fruit 
requirement. Cooked dry beans or peas may be used as a meat alternate or 
as a vegetable, but not as both food components in the same meal. For 
children in kindergarten through grade six, the requirement for this 
component is based on minimum daily servings plus an additional \1/2\ 
cup in any combination over a five day period.
    (5) Grains/breads. (i) All grains/breads such as bread, biscuits, 
muffins or rice, macaroni, noodles, other pastas or cereal grains such 
as bulgur or corn grits, shall be enriched or whole grain or made with 
enriched or whole grain meal or flour.
    (ii) Unlike the other component requirements, the grains/breads 
requirement is based on minimum daily servings and total servings per 
week. The requirement for this component is based on minimum daily 
servings plus total servings over a five day period. The servings for 
biscuits, rolls, muffins, and other grain/bread varieties are specified 
in the Food Buying Guide for Child Nutrition Programs (PA 1331), an FCS 
publication.
    (6) Offer versus serve. Each school shall offer its students all 
five required food items as set forth in the table presented under 
paragraph (k)(2) of this section. Senior high students shall be 
permitted to decline up to two of the five required food items. At the 
discretion of the school food authority, students below the senior high 
level may be permitted to decline one or two of the required five food 
items. The price of a reimbursable lunch shall not be affected if a 
student declines food items or accepts smaller portions. State 
educational agencies shall define ``senior high.''
    (7) Outlying areas. Schools in American Samoa, Puerto Rico and the 
Virgin Islands may serve a starchy vegetable such as yams, plantains, or 
sweet potatoes to meet the grain/bread requirement. For the Commonwealth 
of the Northern Mariana Islands, FCS has established a menu consistent 
with the food-based menu alternative and with local food consumption 
patterns and which, given available food supplies and food service 
equipment and facilities, provides optimum nutrition consistent with 
sound dietary habits for participating children. The State agency shall 
attach to and make a part of the written agreement required under 
Sec. 210.9 the requirements of that menu option.
    (l) Milk. (1) Varieties. Regardless of the menu planning alternative 
chosen,

[[Page 29]]

schools shall offer students fluid milk. The selection of the types of 
milk offered shall be consistent with the types of milk consumed in the 
prior year. This requirement does not preclude schools from offering 
additional kinds of milk. However, in the event that a particular type 
of milk represents less than one (1) percent of the total amount of milk 
consumed in the previous year, a school may elect not to make this type 
of milk available. All milk served shall be pasteurized fluid types of 
milk which meet State and local standards for such milk; except that, in 
the meal pattern for infants under 1 year of age, the milk shall be 
unflavored types of whole fluid milk or an equivalent quantity of 
reconstituted evaporated milk which meets such standards. All milk shall 
contain vitamins A and D at levels specified by the Food and Drug 
Administration and be consistent with State and local standards for such 
milk.
    (2) Insufficient milk supply. The inability of a school to obtain a 
supply of milk shall not bar it from participation in the Program and is 
to be resolved as follows:
    (i) If emergency conditions temporarily prevent a school that 
normally has a supply of fluid milk from obtaining delivery of such 
milk, the State agency may approve the service of lunches during the 
emergency period with an available alternate form of milk or without 
milk.
    (ii) If a school is unable to obtain a supply of any type of fluid 
milk on a continuing basis, the State agency may approve the service of 
lunches without milk if the school uses an equivalent amount of canned 
or dry milk in the preparation of the lunch. In Alaska, Hawaii, American 
Samoa, Guam, Puerto Rico, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana 
Islands, and the Virgin Islands, if a sufficient supply of fluid milk 
cannot be obtained, ``milk'' shall include reconstituted or recombined 
milk, or as otherwise provided under written exception by FCS.
    (m) Infant lunch pattern. (1) Definitions for infant meals. For the 
purpose of this section:
    (i) Infant cereal means any iron-fortified dry cereal especially 
formulated and generally recognized as cereal for infants and that is 
routinely mixed with formula or milk prior to consumption.
    (ii) Infant formula means any iron-fortified formula intended for 
dietary use solely as a food for normal, healthy infants; excluding 
those formulas specifically formulated for infants with inborn errors of 
metabolism or digestive or absorptive problems. Infant formula, as 
served, must be in liquid state at recommended dilution.
    (2) Infants under the age of one. Infants under 1 year of age shall 
be served an infant lunch as specified in this paragraph when they 
participate in the Program. Foods within the infant lunch pattern shall 
be of texture and consistency appropriate for the particular age group 
being served, and shall be served to the infant during a span of time 
consistent with the infant's eating habits. For infants 4 through 7 
months of age, solid foods are optional and should be introduced only 
when the infant is developmentally ready. Whenever possible the school 
should consult with the infant's parent in making the decision to 
introduce solid foods. Solid foods should be introduced one at a time on 
a gradual basis with the intent of ensuring health and nutritional well-
being. For infants 8 through 11 months of age, the total amount of food 
authorized in the meal patterns set forth below must be provided in 
order to qualify for reimbursement. Additional foods may be served to 
infants 4 months of age and older with the intent of improving their 
overall nutrition. Breast milk, provided by the infant's mother, may be 
served in place of infant formula from birth through 11 months of age. 
However, meals containing only breast milk do not qualify for 
reimbursement. Meals containing breast milk served to infants 4 months 
of age or older may be claimed for reimbursement when the other meal 
component or components are supplied by the school. Although it is 
recommended that either breast milk or iron-fortified infant formula be 
served for the entire first year, whole milk may be served beginning at 
8 months of age as long as infants are 

[[Page 30]]

consuming one-third of their calories as a balanced mixture of cereal, 
fruits, vegetables, and other foods in order to ensure adequate sources 
of iron and vitamin C. The infant lunch pattern shall contain, as a 
minimum, each of the following components in the amounts indicated for 
the appropriate age group:
    (i) Birth through 3 months--4 to 6 fluid ounces of iron-fortified 
infant formula.
    (ii) 4 through 7 months:
    (A) 4 to 8 fluid ounces of iron-fortified infant formula;
    (B) 0 to 3 tablespoons of iron-fortified dry infant cereal 
(optional); and
    (C) 0 to 3 tablespoons of fruit or vegetable of appropriate 
consistency or a combination of both (optional).
    (iii) 8 through 11 months:
    (A) 6 to 8 fluid ounces of iron-fortified infant formula or 6 to 8 
fluid ounces of whole milk;
    (B) 2 to 4 tablespoons of iron-fortified dry infant cereal and/or 1 
to 4 tablespoons meat, fish, poultry, egg yolk, or cooked dry beans or 
peas, or \1/2\ to 2 ounces (weight) of cheese or 1 to 4 ounces (weight 
or volume) of cottage cheese, cheese food or cheese spread of 
appropriate consistency; and
    (C) 1 to 4 tablespoons of fruit or vegetable of appropriate 
consistency or a combination of both.
    (n) Supplemental food. Eligible schools operating afterschool care 
programs may be reimbursed for one meal supplement served to an eligible 
child (as defined in Sec. 210.2) per day.
    (1) Eligible schools mean schools that:
    (i) Operate school lunch programs under the National School Lunch 
Act;
    (ii) Sponsor afterschool care programs as defined in Sec. 210.2; and
    (iii) Were participating in the Child and Adult Care Food Program as 
of May 15, 1989.
    (2) Meal supplements shall contain two different components from the 
following four:
    (i) A serving of fluid milk as a beverage, or on cereal, or used in 
part for each purpose;
    (ii) A serving of meat or meat alternate. Nuts and seeds and their 
butters listed in program guidance are nutritionally comparable to meat 
or other meat alternates based on available nutritional data. Acorns, 
chestnuts, and coconuts are excluded and shall not be used as meat 
alternates due to their low protein content. Nut or seed meals or flours 
shall not be used as a meat alternate except as defined under appendix 
A: Alternate Foods for Meals of this part;
    (iii) A serving of vegetable(s) or fruit(s) or full-strength 
vegetable or fruit juice, or an equivalent quantity of any combination 
of these foods. Juice may not be served when milk is served as the only 
other component;
    (iv) A serving of whole-grain or enriched bread; or an equivalent 
serving of cornbread, biscuits, rolls, muffins, etc., made with whole-
grain or enriched meal or flour; or a serving of cooked whole-grain or 
enriched pasta or noodle products such as macaroni, or cereal grains 
such as rice, bulgur, or corn grits; or an equivalent quantity of any 
combination of these foods.
    (3) Infant supplements shall contain the following:
    (i) Birth through 3 months: 4-6 fluid ounces of infant formula.
    (ii) 4 through 7 months: 4-6 fluid ounces of infant formula.
    (iii) 8 through 11 months: 2-4 fluid ounces of infant formula or 
whole fluid milk or full strength fruit juice; 0-\1/2\ slice of crusty 
bread or 0-2 cracker type products made from whole-grain or enriched 
meal or flour that are suitable for an infant for use as a finger food 
when appropriate. To improve the nutrition of participating children 
over one year of age, additional foods may be served with the meal 
supplements as desired.
    (iv) The minimum amounts of food components to be served as meal 
supplements as set forth in paragraph (n)(3) of this section are as 
follows. Select two different components from the four listed. (Juice 
may not be served when milk is served as the only other component.)

[[Page 31]]



                                       Meal Supplement Chart for Children                                       
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   Snack (supplement) for children        Children 1 and 2        Children 3 through 5    Children 6 through 12 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  (Select two different components                                                                              
        from the four listed)                                                                                   
                                                                                                                
Milk, fluid.........................  \1/2\ cup...............  \1/2\ cup..............  1 cup.                 
Meat or meat alternate \4\..........  \1/2\ ounce.............  \1/2\ ounce............  1 ounce.               
Juice or fruit or vegetable.........  \1/2\ cup...............  \1/2\ cup..............  \3/4\ cup.             
Bread and/or cereal: Enriched or      \1/2\ slice.............  \1/2\ slice............  1 slice.               
 whole grain bread or.                                                                                          
Cereal: Cold dry or.................  \1/4\ cup \1\...........  \1/3\ cup \2\..........  \3/4\ cup \3\.         
Hot cooked..........................  \1/4\ cup...............  \1/4\ cup..............  \1/2\ cup.             
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ \1/4\ cup (volume) or \1/3\ ounce (weight), whichever is less.                                              
\2\ \1/3\ cup (volume) or \1/2\ ounce (weight), whichever is less.                                              
\3\ \3/4\ cup (volume) or 1 ounce (weight), whichever is less.                                                  
\4\ Yogurt may be used as meat/meat alternate in the snack only. You may serve 4 ounces (weight) or \1/2\ cup   
  (volume) of plain, or sweetened and flavored yogurt to fulfill the equivalent of 1 ounce of the meat/meat     
  alternate component. For younger children, 2 ounces (weight) or \1/4\ cup (volume) may fulfill the equivalent 
  of \1/2\ ounce of the meat/meat alternate requirement.                                                        
Caution: Children under five years of age are at the highest risk of choking. USDA recommends that nuts and/or  
  seeds be served to them ground or finely chopped in a prepared food.                                          


                                             Supplements for Infants                                            
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                         Four months through seven                                              
      Birth through three months                   months                 Eight months through eleven months    
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
4-6 fluid ounces formula \1\.........  4-6 fluid ounces formula \1\.  2-4 fluid ounces formula,\1\ breast       
                                                                       milk,\4\ whole milk or fruit juice.\2\ 0-
                                                                       \1/2\ slice bread or 0-2 crackers        
                                                                       (optional).\3\                           
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Shall be iron-fortified infant formula.                                                                     
\2\ Shall be full-strength fruit juice.                                                                         
\3\ Shall be from whole-grain or enriched meal or flour.                                                        
\4\ Breast milk provided by the infant's mother may be served in place of formula from birth through 11 months. 
  Meals containing only breast milk are not reimbursable. Meals containing breast milk served to infants 4      
  months or older may be claimed when the other meal component(s) is supplied by the school.                    

    (o) Implementation of the nutrition standards. School food 
authorities shall comply with the 1990 Dietary Guidelines for Americans 
as provided in paragraph (b) of this section no later than School Year 
1996-97 except that State agencies may grant waivers to postpone 
implementation until no later than School Year 1998-99. Such waivers 
shall be granted by the State agency using guidance provided by the 
Secretary.

[60 FR 31208, June 13, 1995, 60 FR 57146, Nov. 14, 1995, as amended at 
61 FR 37671, July 19, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 210.10a  Lunch components and quantities for the meal pattern.

    (a) Meal pattern definitions. For the purpose of this section:
    (1) Infant cereal means any iron-fortified dry cereal especially 
formulated and generally recognized as cereal for infants and that is 
routinely mixed with formula or milk prior to consumption.
    (2) Infant formula means any iron-fortified formula intended for 
dietary use solely as a food for normal, healthy infants; excluding 
those formulas specifically formulated for infants with inborn errors of 
metabolism or digestive or absorptive problems. Infant formula, as 
served, must be in liquid state at recommended dilution.
    (b) General. School food authorities shall ensure that participating 
schools provide nutritious and well-balanced lunches to children in 
accordance with the provisions of this section. The requirements and 
recommendations of this section are designed so that the nutrients of 
the lunch, averaged over a period of time, approximate one-third of the 
Recommended Dietary Allowances for children of each age/grade group as 
specified in paragraph (c) of this section. School food authorities 
shall ensure that each lunch is priced as a unit. Except as otherwise 
provided herein, school food authorities shall ensure that sufficient 
quantities of food are planned and produced so that lunches provided 
contain all the required food items in at least the amounts indicated in 
the table presented under paragraph (c) of this section. School food 
authorities shall ensure that lunches are planned and produced on the 
basis of participation trends, with the objective of providing one 
reimbursable lunch per child per day. Production and menu

[[Page 32]]

records shall be maintained to demonstrate that the required number of 
food components and food items are offered on any given day. Production 
records shall include sufficient information to evaluate the menu's 
contribution to the lunch pattern specified in paragraph (c) of this 
section. Any excess lunches that are produced may be served, but shall 
not be claimed for general or special cash assistance provided under 
Sec. 210.4. The component requirements for meal supplements served under 
the CACFP shall also apply to meal supplements served by eligible school 
food authorities in afterschool care programs under the NSLP.
    (c) Minimum required lunch quantities. Schools that are able to 
provide quantities of food to children solely on the basis of their ages 
or grade level should do so. Schools that cannot serve children on the 
basis of age or grade level shall provide all school age children Group 
IV portions as specified in the table presented in this paragraph. 
Schools serving children on the basis of age or grade level shall plan 
and produce sufficient quantities of food to provide Groups I-IV no less 
than the amounts specified for those children in the table presented in 
this paragraph, and sufficient quantities of food to provide Group V no 
less than the specified amounts for Group IV. It is recommended that 
such schools plan and produce sufficient quantities of food to provide 
Group V children the larger amounts specified in the table. Schools that 
provide increased portion sizes for Group V may comply with children's 
requests for smaller portion sizes of the food items; however, schools 
shall plan and produce sufficient quantities of food to at least provide 
the serving sizes required for Group IV. Schools shall ensure that 
lunches are served with the objective of providing the per lunch 
minimums for each age and grade level as specified in the following 
table:

                                    School Lunch Pattern--Per Lunch Minimums                                    
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                       Minimum Quantities                           Recommended 
                               ------------------------------------------------------------------   quantities: 
Food Components and Food Items                                                     Group IV, age    Group V, 12 
                                Group I, age 1-  Group II, age 3- Group III, age  9 and older (4-    years and  
                                 2 (Preschool)    4 (Preschool)      5-8 (K-3)          12)        older (7-12) 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Milk (as a beverage):       \3/4\ cup (6     \3/4\ cup (6     \1/2\ pint (8   \1/2\ pint (8   \1/2\ pint (8 
     Fluid whole milk and        fl. oz.).        fl. oz.).        fl. oz.).       fl. oz.).       fl. oz.)     
     fluid unflavored lowfat                                                                                    
     milk must be offered;                                                                                      
     (Flavored fluid milk,                                                                                      
     skim milk or buttermilk                                                                                    
     optional).                                                                                                 
Meat or Meat Alternate                                                                                          
 (quantity of the edible                                                                                        
 portion as served):                                                                                            
    Lean meat, poultry, or      1 oz...........  1\1/2\ oz......  1\1/2\ oz.....  2 oz..........  3 oz.         
     fish.                                                                                                      
    Cheese....................  1 oz...........  1\1/2\ oz......  1\1/2\ oz.....  2 oz..........  3 oz.         
    Large egg.................  \1/2\..........  \3/4\..........  \3/4\.........  1.............  1\1/2\        
    Cooked dry beans or peas..  \1/4\ cup......  \3/8\ cup......  \3/8\ cup.....  \1/2\ cup.....  \3/4\ cup     
    Peanut butter or other nut  2 Tbsp.........  3 Tbsp.........  3 Tbsp........  4 Tbsp........  6 Tbsp.       
     or seed butters.                                                                                           
    The following may be used                                                                                   
     to meet no more than 50%                                                                                   
     of the requirement and                                                                                     
     must be used in                                                                                            
     combination with any of                                                                                    
     the above:                                                                                                 
        Peanuts, soynuts, tree  \1/2\ oz.=50%..  \3/4\ oz.=50%..  \3/4\ oz.=50%.  1 oz.=50%.....  1\1/2\        
         nuts, or seeds, as                                                                        oz.=50%.     
         listed in program                                                                                      
         guidance, or an                                                                                        
         equivalent quantity                                                                                    
         of any combination of                                                                                  
         the above meat/meat                                                                                    
         alternate (1oz. of                                                                                     
         nuts/seeds = 1oz. of                                                                                   
         cooked lean meat,                                                                                      
         poultry, or fish.                                                                                      
Vegetable or Fruit: 2 or more   \1/2\ cup......  \1/2\ cup......  \1/2\ cup.....  \3/4\ cup.....  \3/4\ cup.    
 servings of vegetables or                                                                                      
 fruits or both.                                                                                                

[[Page 33]]

                                                                                                                
Bread or Bread Alternate        5 per week--     8 per week--     8 per week--    8 per week--    10 per week-- 
 (Servings per week): Must be    minimum of \1/   minimum of 1     minimum of 1    minimum of 1    minimum of 1 
 enriched or whole grain. A      2\ day.          per day.         per day.        per day.        per day.     
 serving is a slice of bread                                                                                    
 or an equivalent serving of                                                                                    
 biscuits, rolls, etc., or \1/                                                                                  
 2\ cup of cooked rice,                                                                                         
 macaroni, noodles, other                                                                                       
 pasta products or cereal                                                                                       
 grains.                                                                                                        
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (d) Lunch components. This section specifies the basic food 
components of the school lunch pattern which shall be served as food 
items in quantities specified in paragraph (c) of this section.
    (1) Milk. Schools shall offer students fluid whole milk and fluid 
unflavored lowfat milk. This requirement does not preclude schools from 
offering additional kinds of milk.
    All milk served shall be pasteurized fluid types of milk which meet 
State and local standards for such milk; except that, in the meal 
pattern for infants under 1 year of age, the milk shall be unflavored 
types of whole fluid milk or an equivalent quantity of reconstituted 
evaporated milk which meets such standards. All milk shall contain 
vitamins A and D at levels specified by the Food and Drug Administration 
and consistent with State and local standards for such milk. School food 
authorities that served \3/4\ cup (6 fluid ounces) of milk to Group III 
children prior to May 1, 1980, may continue to do so. Such school food 
authorities shall retain documentation of the date on which they began 
such service and the reasons for adopting this portion size.
    (2) Meat or meat alternate. The quantity of meat or meat alternate 
shall be the quantity of the edible portion as served. When the school 
determines that the portion size of a meat alternate is excessive, it 
shall reduce the portion size of that particular meat alternate and 
supplement it with another meat/meat alternate to meet the full 
requirement. To be counted as meeting the requirement, the meat or meat 
alternate shall be served in a main dish or in a main dish and only one 
other menu item. The Department recommends that if schools do not offer 
children choices of meat or meat alternates each day, they serve no one 
meat alternate or form of meat (e.g., ground, diced, pieces) more than 
three times in a single week.
    (i) Vegetable protein products and enriched macaroni with fortified 
protein defined in appendix A may be used to meet part of the meat or 
meat alternate requirement when used as specified in appendix A. An 
enriched macaroni product with fortified protein as defined in appendix 
A may be used as part of a meat alternate or as a bread alternate, but 
not as both food components in the same meal.
    (ii) Nuts and seeds and their butters listed in program guidance are 
nutritionally comparable to meat or other meat alternates based on 
available nutritional data. Acorns, chestnuts, and coconuts shall not be 
used as meat alternates due to their low protein and iron content. Nut 
and seed meals or flours shall not be used as a meat alternate except as 
defined in this part under Appendix A: Alternate Foods for Meals. As 
noted in the School Lunch Pattern table of this section, nuts or seeds 
may be used to meet no more than one-half of the meat/meat alternate 
requirement. Therefore, nuts and seeds must be used in the meal with 
another meat/meat alternate to fulfill the requirement.
    (3) Vegetable or fruit. Full strength vegetable or fruit juice may 
be counted to meet not more than one-half of the vegetable/fruit 
requirement. Cooked dry beans or peas may be used as a meat alternate or 
as a vegetable, but not as both food components in the same meal.

[[Page 34]]

    (4) Bread or bread alternate. (i) All breads or bread alternates 
such as bread, biscuits, muffins or rice, macaroni, noodles, other 
pastas or cereal grains such as bulgur or corn grits, shall be enriched 
or whole grain or made with enriched or whole grain meal or flour.
    (ii) Unlike the other component requirements, the bread requirement 
is based on minimum daily servings and total servings per week. Schools 
shall serve daily at least one-half serving of bread or bread alternate 
to children in Group I and at least one serving to children in Groups 
II-V. Schools which serve lunch at least 5 days a week shall serve a 
total of at least five servings of bread or bread alternate to children 
in Group I and eight servings per week to children in Groups II-V. 
Schools serving lunch 6 or 7 days per week should increase the weekly 
quantity by approximately 20 percent (\1/5\) for each additional day. 
When schools operate less than 5 days per week, they may decrease the 
weekly quantity by approximately 20 percent (\1/5\) for each day less 
than five. The servings for biscuits, rolls, muffins, and other bread 
alternates are specified in the Food Buying Guide for Child Nutrition 
Programs (PA 1331), an FCS publication.
    (e) Offer versus serve. Each school shall offer its students all 
five required food items as set forth in the table presented under 
paragraph (c). Senior high students shall be permitted to decline up to 
two of the five required food items. At the discretion of the school 
food authority, students below the senior high level may be permitted to 
decline one or two of the required five food items. The price of a 
reimbursable lunch shall not be affected if a student declines food 
items or accepts smaller portions. State educational agencies shall 
define ``senior high.''
    (f) Choice. To provide variety and to encourage consumption and 
participation, schools should, whenever possible, provide a selection of 
foods and types of milk from which children may make choices. When a 
school offers a selection of more than one type of lunch or when it 
offers a variety of foods and milk for choice within the required lunch 
pattern, the school shall offer all children the same selection 
regardless of whether the children are eligible for free or reduced 
price lunches or pay the school food authority designated full price. 
The school may establish different unit prices for each type of lunch 
served provided that the benefits made available to children eligible 
for free or reduced price lunches are not affected.
    (g) Lunch period. At or about mid-day schools shall serve lunches 
which meet the requirements of this part during a period designated as 
the lunch period by the school food authority. Such lunch periods shall 
occur between 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m., unless otherwise exempted by 
FCS. With State approval, schools that serve children 1-5 years old are 
encouraged to divide the service of the specified quantities and food 
items into two distinct service periods. Such schools may divide the 
quantities and/or food items between these service periods in any 
combination that they choose.
    (h) Infant lunch pattern. Infants under 1 year of age shall be 
served an infant lunch as specified in this paragraph when they 
participate in the Program. Foods within the infant lunch pattern shall 
be of texture and consistency appropriate for the particular age group 
being served, and shall be served to the infant during a span of time 
consistent with the infant's eating habits. For infants 4 through 7 
months of age, solid foods are optional and should be introduced only 
when the infant is developmentally ready. Whenever possible the school 
should consult with the infant's parent in making the decision to 
introduce solid foods. Solid foods should be introduced one at a time on 
a gradual basis with the intent of ensuring health and nutritional well-
being. For infants 8 through 11 months of age, the total amount of food 
authorized in the meal patterns set forth below must be provided in 
order to qualify for reimbursement. Additional foods may be served to 
infants 4 months of age and older with the intent of improving their 
overall nutrition. Breast milk, provided by the infant's mother may be 
served in place of infant formula from birth through 11 months of age. 
However, meals containing only breast milk do not qualify for 
reimbursement. Meals containing

[[Page 35]]

breast milk served to infants 4 months of age or older may be claimed 
for reimbursement when the other meal component or components are 
supplied by the school. Although it is recommended that either breast 
milk or iron-fortified infant formula be served for the entire first 
year, whole milk may be served beginning at 8 months of age as long as 
infants are consuming one-third of their calories as a balanced mixture 
of cereal, fruits, vegetables, and other foods in order to ensure 
adequate sources of iron and vitamin C. The infant lunch pattern shall 
contain, as a minimum, each of the following components in the amounts 
indicated for the appropriate age group:
    (1) Birth through 3 months--4 to 6 fluid ounces of iron-fortified 
infant formula.
    (2) 4 through 7 months--(i) 4 to 8 fluid ounces of iron-fortified 
infant formula; (ii) 0 to 3 tablespoons of iron-fortified dry infant 
cereal (optional); and (iii) 0 to 3 tablespoons of fruit or vegetable of 
appropriate consistency or a combination of both (optional).
    (3) 8 through 11 months--(i) 6 to 8 fluid ounces of iron-fortified 
infant formula or 6 to 8 fluid ounces of whole milk; (ii) 2 to 4 
tablespoons of iron-fortified dry infant cereal and/or 1 to 4 
tablespoons meat, fish, poultry, egg yolk, or cooked dry beans or peas, 
or \1/2\ to 2 ounces (weight) of cheese or 1 to 4 ounces (weight or 
volume) of cottage cheese, cheese food or cheese spread of appropriate 
consistency; and (iii) 1 to 4 tablespoons of fruit or vegetable of 
appropriate consistency or a combination of both.
    (i) Exceptions. Lunches claimed for reimbursement shall meet the 
school lunch pattern requirements specified in paragraphs (c) and (d) of 
this section. However, lunches served which accommodate the exceptions 
and variations authorized under this paragraph are also reimbursable. 
Exceptions and variations are restricted to the following:
    (1) Medical or dietary needs. Schools shall make substitutions in 
foods listed in this section for students who are considered handicapped 
under 7 CFR part 15b and whose handicap restricts their diet. Schools 
may also make substitutions for nonhandicapped students who are unable 
to consume the regular lunch because of medical or other special dietary 
needs. Substitutions shall be made on a case by case basis only when 
supported by a statement of the need for substitutions that includes 
recommended alternate foods, unless otherwise exempted by FCS. Such 
statement shall, in the case of a handicapped student, be signed by a 
physician or, in the case of a nonhandicapped student, by a recognized 
medical authority.
    (2) Ethnic, religious or economic variations. FCS may approve 
variations in the food components of the lunch on an experimental or on 
a continuing basis in any school where there is evidence that such 
variations are nutritionally sound and are necessary to meet ethnic, 
religious, or economic needs.
    (3) Foreign meal patterns. Schools in American Samoa, Puerto Rico 
and the Virgin Islands may serve a starchy vegetable such as yams, 
plantains, or sweet potatoes to meet the bread or bread alternate 
requirement. For the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, FCS 
has established a meal pattern which is consistent with local food 
consumption patterns and which, given available food supplies and food 
service equipment and facilities, provides optimum nutrition consistent 
with sound dietary habits for participating children. The State agency 
shall attach to and make a part of the written agreement required under 
Sec. 210.9, the requirements of that pattern.
    (4) Natural disaster. In the event of a natural disaster or other 
catastrophe, FCS may temporarily allow schools to serve lunches for 
reimbursement that do not meet requirements of this section.
    (5) Insufficient milk supply. The inability of a school to obtain a 
supply of milk shall not bar it from participation in the Program and is 
to be resolved as follows:
    (i) If emergency conditions temporarily prevent a school that 
normally has a supply of fluid milk from obtaining delivery of such 
milk, the State agency may approve the service of lunches during the 
emergency period with an available alternate form of milk or without 
milk.

[[Page 36]]

    (ii) If a school is unable to obtain a supply of fluid whole milk 
and fluid unflavored milk containing two percent or less milk fats on a 
continuing basis, the State agency may approve the service of either 
fluid whole milk or fluid unflavored milk containing two percent or less 
milk fats. The Department recommends that the State agency approve for 
service the available fluid milk with the lowest fat and sugar content. 
In Alaska, Hawaii, American Samoa, Guam, Puerto Rico, the Commonwealth 
of the Northern Marianas, and the Virgin Islands, if a sufficient supply 
of fluid milk cannot be obtained, ``milk'' shall include reconstituted 
or recombined milk, or as otherwise provided under written exception by 
FCS.
    (iii) If a school is unable to obtain a supply of any type of fluid 
milk on a continuing basis, the State agency may approve the service of 
lunches without milk if the school uses an equivalent amount of canned, 
whole or nonfat dry milk in the preparation of the lunch.
    (j) Supplemental food. Eligible schools operating afterschool care 
programs may be reimbursed for one meal supplement served to an eligible 
child (as defined in Sec. 210.2) per day.
    (1) Eligible schools mean schools that:
    (i) Operate school lunch programs under the National School Lunch 
Act;
    (ii) Sponsor afterschool care programs as defined in Sec. 210.2; and
    (iii) Were participating in the CACFP as of May 15, 1989.
    (2) Meal supplements shall contain two different components from the 
following four:
    (i) A serving of fluid milk as a beverage, or on cereal, or used in 
part for each purpose;
    (ii) A serving of meat or meat alternate. Nuts and seeds and their 
butters listed in program guidance are nutritionally comparable to meat 
or other meat alternates based on available nutritional data. Acorns, 
chestnuts, and coconuts are excluded and shall not be used as meat 
alternates due to their low protein content. Nut or seed meals or flours 
shall not be used as a meat alternate except as defined in this part 
under Appendix A: Alternate Foods for Meals;
    (iii) A serving of vegetable(s) or fruit(s) or full-strength 
vegetable or fruit juice, or an equivalent quantity of any combination 
of these foods. Juice may not be served when milk is served as the only 
other component;
    (iv) A serving of whole-grain or enriched bread; or an equivalent 
serving of cornbread, biscuits, rolls, muffins, etc., made with whole-
grain or enriched meal or flour; or a serving of cooked whole-grain or 
enriched pasta or noodle products such as macaroni, or cereal grains 
such as rice, bulgur, or corn grits; or an equivalent quantity of any 
combination of these foods.
    (3) Infant supplements shall contain the following:
    (i) Birth through 3 months: 4-6 fluid ounces of infant formula.
    (ii) 4 through 7 months: 4-6 fluid ounces of infant formula.
    (iii) 8 through 11 months: 2-4 fluid ounces of infant formula or 
whole fluid milk or full strength fruit juice; 0-\1/2\ slice of crusty 
bread or 0-2 cracker type products made from whole-grain or enriched 
meal or flour that are suitable for an infant for use as a finger food 
when appropriate. To improve the nutrition of participating children 
over one year of age, additional foods may be served with the meal 
supplements as desired.
    The minimum amounts of food components to be served as meal 
supplements as set forth in paragraph (j)(3) of this section are as 
follows. Select two different components from the four listed. (Juice 
may not be served when milk is served as the only other component.)

                                       Meal Supplement Chart for Children                                       
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   Snack (supplement) for children        Children 1 and 2       Children 3 through 5     Children 6 through 12 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
(Select 2 different components from                                                                             
 the 4 listed):                                                                                                 
    Milk, fluid.....................  \1/2\ cup..............  \1/2\ cup..............  1 cup.                  
    Meat or meat alternate \4\......  \1/2\ ounce............  \1/2\ ounce............  1 ounce.                
    Juice or fruit or vegetable.....  \1/2\ cup..............  \1/2\ cup..............  \3/4\ cup.              

[[Page 37]]

                                                                                                                
Bread and/or cereal:                                                                                            
    Enriched or whole grain bread or  \1/2\ slice............  \1/2\ slice............  1 slice.                
Cereal:                                                                                                         
    Cold dry or.....................  \1/4\ cup \1\..........  \1/3\ cup \2\..........  \3/4\ cup.\3\           
    Hot cooked......................  \1/4\ cup..............  \1/4\ cup..............  \1/2\ cup.              
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ \1/4\ cup (volume) or \1/3\ ounce (weight), whichever is less                                               
\2\ \1/3\ cup (volume) or \1/2\ ounce (weight), whichever is less.                                              
\3\ \3/4\ cup (volume) or 1 ounce (weight), whichever is less.                                                  
\4\ Yogurt may be used as meat/meat alternate in the snack only. You may serve 4 ounces (weight) or \1/2\ cup   
  (volume) of plain, or sweetened and flavored yogurt to fulfill the equivalent of 1 ounce of the meat/meat     
  alternate component. For younger children, 2 ounces (weight) or \1/4\ cup (volume) may fulfill the equivalent 
  of \1/2\ ounce of the meat/meat alternate requirement.                                                        
Caution: Children under five years of age are at the highest risk of choking. USDA recommends that nuts and/or  
  seeds be served to them ground or finely chopped in a prepared food.                                          


                         Supplements for Infants                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 4 months through    8 months through 11
    Birth through 3 months           7 months              months       
------------------------------------------------------------------------
4-6 fluid ounces formula.\1\    4-6 fluid ounces   2-4 fluid ounces     
                                 formula.\1\        formula,\1\ breast  
                                                    milk,\4\ whole milk 
                                                    or fruit juice.\2\ 0-
                                                    \1/2\ slice bread or
                                                    0-2 crackers        
                                                    (optional).\3\      
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Shall be iron-fortified infant formula.                             
\2\ Shall be full-strength fruit juice.                                 
\3\ Shall be from whole-grain or enriched meal or flour.                
\4\ Breast milk provided by the infant's mother may be served in place  
  of formula from birth through 11 months. Meals containing only breast 
  milk are not reimbursable. Meals containing breast milk served to     
  infants 4 months or older may be claimed when the other meal          
  component(s) is supplied by the child care facility.                  


[53 FR 25308, July 6, 1988; 53 FR 48632, Dec. 2, 1988, as amended at 55 
FR 18858, May 7, 1990; 56 FR 32941, July 17, 1991; 58 FR 42488, Aug. 10, 
1993. Redesignated at 60 FR 31208, June 13, 1995, as amended at 60 FR 
31214, June 13, 1995; 61 FR 37671, July 19, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 210.11  Competitive food services.

    (a) Definitions. For the purpose of this section:
    (1) Competitive foods means any foods sold in competition with the 
Program to children in food service areas during the lunch periods.
    (2) Food of minimal nutritional value means: (i) In the case of 
artificially sweetened foods, a food which provides less than five 
percent of the Reference Daily Intakes (RDI) for each of eight specified 
nutrients per serving; and (ii) in the case of all other foods, a food 
which provides less than five percent of the RDI for each of eight 
specified nutrients per 100 calories and less than five percent of the 
RDI for each of eight specified nutrients per serving. The eight 
nutrients to be assessed for this purpose are--protein, vitamin A, 
vitamin C, niacin, riboflavin, thiamine, calcium, and iron. All 
categories of food of minimal nutritional value and petitioning 
requirements for changing the categories are listed in appendix B of 
this part.
    (b) General. State agencies and school food authorities shall 
establish such rules or regulations as are necessary to control the sale 
of foods in competition with lunches served under the Program. Such 
rules or regulations shall prohibit the sale of foods of minimal 
nutritional value, as listed in appendix B of this part, in the food 
service areas during the lunch periods. The sale of other competitive 
foods may, at the discretion of the State agency and school food 
authority, be allowed in the food service area during the lunch period 
only if all income from the sale of such foods accrues to the benefit of 
the nonprofit school food service or the school or student organizations 
approved by the school. State agencies and school food authorities may 
impose additional restrictions on the sale of and income from all foods 
sold at any time throughout schools participating in the Program.

[53 FR 29147, Aug. 2, 1988, as amended at 59 FR 23614, May 6, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 210.12  Student, parent and community involvement.

    (a) General. School food authorities shall promote activities to 
involve students and parents in the Program. Such activities may include 
menu

[[Page 38]]

planning, enhancement of the eating environment, Program promotion, and 
related student-community support activities. School food authorities 
are encouraged to use the school food service program to teach students 
about good nutrition practices and to involve the school faculty and the 
general community in activities to enhance the Program.
    (b) Food service management companies. School food authorities 
contracting with a food service management company shall comply with the 
provisions of Sec. 210.16(a) regarding the establishment of an advisory 
board of parents, teachers and students.
    (c) Residential child care institutions. Residential child care 
institutions shall comply with the provisions of this section, to the 
extent possible.


<R05>
Sec. 210.13  Facilities management.

    (a) Health standards. The school food authority shall ensure that 
food storage, preparation and service is in accordance with the 
sanitation and health standards established under State and local law 
and regulations.
    (b) Storage. The school food authority shall ensure that the 
necessary facilities for storage, preparation and service of food are 
maintained. Facilities for the handling, storage, and distribution of 
purchased and donated foods shall be such as to properly safeguard 
against theft, spoilage and other loss.


<R05>
Sec. 210.14  Resource management.

    (a) Nonprofit school food service. School food authorities shall 
maintain a nonprofit school food service. Revenues received by the 
nonprofit school food service are to be used only for the operation or 
improvement of such food service, except that, such revenues shall not 
be used to purchase land or buildings, unless otherwise approved by FCS, 
or to construct buildings. Expenditures of nonprofit school food service 
revenues shall be in accordance with the financial management system 
established by the State agency under Sec. 210.19(a) of this part. 
School food authorities may use facilities, equipment, and personnel 
supported with nonprofit school food revenues to support a nonprofit 
nutrition program for the elderly, including a program funded under the 
Older Americans Act of 1965 (42 U.S.C. 3001 et seq.).
    (b) Net cash resources. The school food authority shall limit its 
net cash resources to an amount that does not exceed 3 months average 
expenditures for its nonprofit school food service or such other amount 
as may be approved by the State agency in accordance with 
Sec. 210.19(a).
    (c) Financial assurances. The school food authority shall meet the 
requirements of the State agency for compliance with Sec. 210.19(a) 
including any separation of records of nonprofit school food service 
from records of any other food service which may be operated by the 
school food authority as provided in paragraph (a) of this section.
    (d) Use of donated foods. The school food authority shall enter into 
an agreement with the distributing agency to receive donated foods as 
required by part 250 of this chapter. In addition, the school food 
authority shall accept and use, in as large quantities as may be 
efficiently utilized in its nonprofit school food service, such foods as 
may be offered as a donation by the Department.

[53 FR 29147, Aug. 2, 1988, as amended at 60 FR 31215, June 13, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 210.15  Reporting and recordkeeping.

    (a) Reporting summary. Participating school food authorities are 
required to submit forms and reports to the State agency or the 
distributing agency, as appropriate, to demonstrate compliance with 
Program requirements. These reports include, but are not limited to:
    (1) A Claim for Reimbursement and, for the month of October and as 
otherwise specified by the State agency, supporting data as specified in 
accordance with Sec. 210.8 of this part;
    (2) An application and agreement for Program operations between the 
school food authority and the State agency, and a Free and Reduced Price 
Policy Statement as required under Sec. 210.9;
    (3) A written response to reviews pertaining to corrective action 
taken for Program deficiencies;
    (4) A commodity school's preference whether to receive part of its 
donated food allocation in cash for processing

[[Page 39]]

and handling of donated foods as required under Sec. 210.19(b);
    (5) A written response to audit findings pertaining to the school 
food authority's operation as required under Sec. 210.22; and
    (6) Information on civil rights complaints, if any, and their 
resolution as required under Sec. 210.23.
    (b) Recordkeeping summary. In order to participate in the Program, a 
school food authority shall maintain records to demonstrate compliance 
with Program requirements. These records include but are not limited to:
    (1) Documentation of participation data by school in support of the 
Claim for Reimbursement and data used in the claims review process, as 
required under Sec. 210.8(a), (b), and (c) of this part;
    (2) Production and menu records as required under Sec. 210.10a and 
production and menu records and, if appropriate, nutrition analysis 
records as required under Sec. 210.10, whichever is applicable.
    (3) Participation records to demonstrate positive action toward 
providing one lunch per child per day as required under 
Sec. 210.10(a)(2) or Sec. 210.10a(b), whichever is applicable;
    (4) Currently approved and denied applications for free and reduced 
price lunches and a description of the verification activities, 
including verified applications, and any accompanying source 
documentation in accordance with 7 CFR 245.6a of this Title.

[53 FR 29147, Aug. 2, 1988, as amended at 54 FR 12582, Mar. 28, 1989; 56 
FR 32941, July 17, 1991; 60 FR 31215, June 13, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 210.16  Food service management companies.

    (a) General. Any school food authority (including a State agency 
acting in the capacity of a school food authority) may contract with a 
food service management company to manage its food service operation in 
one or more of its schools. However, no school or school food authority 
may contract with a food service management company to operate an a la 
carte food service unless the company agrees to offer free, reduced 
price and paid reimbursable lunches to all eligible children. Any school 
food authority that employs a food service management company in the 
operation of its nonprofit school food service shall:
    (1) Adhere to the procurement standards specified in Sec. 210.21 
when contracting with the food service management company;
    (2) Ensure that the food service operation is in conformance with 
the school food authority's agreement under the Program;
    (3) Monitor the food service operation through periodic on-site 
visits;
    (4) Retain control of the quality, extent, and general nature of its 
food service, and the prices to be charged the children for meals;
    (5) Retain signature authority on the State agency-school food 
authority agreement, free and reduced price policy statement and claims;
    (6) Ensure that all federally donated foods received by the school 
food authority and made available to the food service management company 
accrue only to the benefit of the school food authority's nonprofit 
school food service and are fully utilized therein;
    (7) Maintain applicable health certification and assure that all 
State and local regulations are being met by a food service management 
company preparing or serving meals at a school food authority facility; 
and
    (8) Establish an advisory board composed of parents, teachers, and 
students to assist in menu planning.
    (b) Invitation to bid. In addition to adhering to the procurement 
standards under Sec. 210.21, school food authorities contracting with 
food service management companies shall ensure that:
    (1) The invitation to bid or request for proposal contains a 21-day 
cycle menu developed in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 210.10 or 
Sec. 210.10a, whichever is applicable, to be used as a standard for the 
purpose of basing bids or estimating average cost per meal. If a school 
food authority has no capability to prepare a cycle menu, it may, with 
State agency approval, request that a 21-day cycle menu developed in 
accordance with the provisions of Sec. 210.10 or Sec. 210.10a, whichever 
is applicable, be developed and submitted by each food service 
management company which intends to submit a bid or proposal to the 
school food authority. The food service management company

[[Page 40]]

must adhere to the cycle for the first 21 days of meal service. Changes 
thereafter may be made with the approval of the school food authority.
    (2) Any invitation to bid or request for proposal indicate that 
nonperformance subjects the food service management company to specified 
sanctions in instances where the food service management company 
violates or breaches contract terms. The school food authority shall 
indicate these sanctions in accordance with the procurement provisions 
stated in Sec. 210.21.
    (c) Contracts. Contracts that permit all income and expenses to 
accrue to the food service management company and ``cost-plus-a-
percentage-of-cost'' and ``cost-plus-a-percentage-of-income'' contracts 
are prohibited. Contracts that provide for fixed fees such as those that 
provide for management fees established on a per meal basis are allowed. 
Contractual agreements with food service management companies shall 
include provisions which ensure that the requirements of this section 
are met. Such agreements shall also include the following:
    (1) The food service management company shall maintain such records 
as the school food authority will need to support its Claim for 
Reimbursement under this part, and shall, at a minimum, report claim 
information to the school food authority promptly at the end of each 
month. Such records shall be made available to the school food 
authority, upon request, and shall be retained in accordance with 
Sec. 210.23(c).
    (2) The food service management company shall have State or local 
health certification for any facility outside the school in which it 
proposes to prepare meals and the food service management company shall 
maintain this health certification for the duration of the contract.
    (3) No payment is to be made for meals that are spoiled or 
unwholesome at time of delivery, do not meet detailed specifications as 
developed by the school food authority for each food component specified 
in Sec. 210.10, or do not otherwise meet the requirements of the 
contract. Specifications shall cover items such a grade, purchase units, 
style, condition, weight, ingredients, formulations, and delivery time.
    (d) Duration of contract. The contract between a school food 
authority and food service management company shall be a of a duration 
of no longer than 1 year; and options for the yearly renewal of a 
contract signed after February 16, 1988, may not exceed 4 additional 
years. All contracts shall include a termination clause whereby either 
party may cancel for cause with 60-day notification.

[53 FR 29147, Aug. 2, 1988, as amended at 60 FR 31215, June 13, 1995]


<R04>
         Subpart D--Requirements for State Agency Participation


<R05>
Sec. 210.17  Matching Federal funds.

    (a) State revenue matching. For each school year, the amount of 
State revenues appropriated or used specifically by the State for 
program purposes shall not be less than 30 percent of the funds received 
by such State under section 4 of the National School Lunch Act during 
the school year beginning July 1, 1980; provided that, the State 
revenues derived from the operation of such programs and State revenues 
expended for salaries and administrative expenses of such programs at 
the State level are not considered in this computation. However, if the 
per capita income of any State is less than the per capita income of the 
United States, the matching requirements so computed shall be decreased 
by the percentage by which the State per capita income is below the per 
capita income of the United States.
    (b) Private school exemption. No State in which the State agency is 
prohibited by law from disbursing State appropriated funds to nonpublic 
schools shall be required to match general cash assistance funds 
expended for meals served in such schools, or to disburse to such 
schools any of the State revenues required to meet the requirements of 
paragraph (a) of this section. Furthermore, the requirements of this 
section do not apply to schools in which the Program is administered by 
a FCSRO.
    (c) Territorial waiver. American Samoa and the Commonwealth of the

[[Page 41]]

Northern Mariana Islands shall be exempted from the matching 
requirements of paragraph (a) of this section if their respective 
matching requirements are under $100,000.
    (d) Applicable revenues. The following State revenues, appropriated 
or used specifically for program purposes which are expended for any 
school year shall be eligible for meeting the applicable percentage of 
the matching requirements prescribed in paragraph (a) of this section 
for that school year:
    (1) State revenues disbursed by the State agency to school food 
authorities for program purposes, including revenue disbursed to 
nonprofit private schools where the State administers the program in 
such schools;
    (2) State revenues made available to school food authorities and 
transferred by the school food authorities to the nonprofit school food 
service accounts or otherwise expended by the school food authorities in 
connection with the nonprofit school food service program; and
    (3) State revenues used to finance the costs (other than State 
salaries or other State level administrative costs) of the nonprofit 
school food service program, i.e.:
    (i) Local program supervision;
    (ii) Operating the program in participating schools; and
    (iii) The intrastate distribution of foods donated under part 250 of 
this chapter to schools participating in the program.
    (e) Distribution of matching revenues. All State revenues made 
available under paragraph (a) of this section are to be disbursed to 
school food authorities participating in the Program, except as provided 
for under paragraph (b) of this section. Distribution of matching 
revenues may be made with respect to a class of school food authorities 
as well as with respect to individual school food authorities.
    (f) Failure to match. If, in any school year, a State fails to meet 
the State revenue matching requirement, as prescribed in paragraph (a) 
of this section, the general cash assistance funds utilized by the State 
during that school year shall be subject to recall by and repayment to 
FCS.
    (g) Reports. Within 120 days after the end of each school year, each 
State agency shall submit an Annual Report of Revenues (FCS-13) to FCS. 
This report identifies the State revenues to be counted toward the State 
revenue matching requirements specified in paragraph (a) of this 
section.
    (h) Accounting system. The State agency shall establish or cause to 
be established a system whereby all expended State revenues counted in 
meeting the matching requirements prescribed in paragraph (a) of this 
section are properly documented and accounted for.


<R05>
Sec. 210.18  Administrative reviews.

    (a) Implementation dates. For the school year beginning July 1, 
1992, each State agency shall conduct administrative reviews as 
prescribed under this section. However, FCS will approve a State 
agency's written request if FCS determines that the State agency has 
demonstrated good cause to delay implementation of the provisions 
specified under this section to January 1, 1993. At State agency 
discretion, State agencies may begin implementation of the provisions of 
this section on August 16, 1991, in lieu of implementing the provisions 
of Sec. 210.18a of this part for school year 1991/1992. FCS review 
responsibilities are specified under Sec. 210.30 of this part.
    (b) Definitions. The following definitions are provided in order to 
clarify State agency administrative review requirements:
    (1) Administrative reviews means the initial comprehensive on-site 
evaluation of all school food authorities participating in the Program 
in accordance with the provisions of this section. The term 
``administrative review'' is used to reflect a review of both critical 
and general areas in accordance with paragraphs (g) and (h) of this 
section, and includes other areas of Program operations determined by 
the State agency to be important to Program performance.
    (2) Critical areas means the following two performance standards 
described in detail in paragraph (g) of this section which serve as 
measures of compliance with Program regulations:

[[Page 42]]

    (i) Performance Standard 1--Certification/Counting/Claiming--All 
free, reduced price and paid lunches claimed for reimbursement are 
served only to children eligible for free, reduced price and paid 
lunches, respectively; and counted, recorded, consolidated and reported 
through a system which consistently yields correct claims.
    (ii) Performance Standard 2--Components--Lunches claimed for 
reimbursement within the school food authority contain food items/
components as required by Program regulations.
    (3) Documented corrective action means written notification required 
of the school food authority to certify that the corrective action 
required for each violation has been completed and to notify the State 
agency of the dates of completion. Documented corrective action may be 
provided at the time of the review or may be submitted to the State 
agency within specified timeframes.
    (4) Follow-up reviews means any visit(s) to the school food 
authority subsequent to the administrative review to ensure corrective 
actions are taken.
    (5) General areas means the areas of review specified in paragraph 
(h) of this section.
    (6) Large school food authority means, in any State:
    (i) All school food authorities that participate in the Program and 
have enrollments of 40,000 children or more each; or
    (ii) If there are less than two school food authorities with 
enrollments of 40,000 or more, the two largest school food authorities 
that participate in the Program and have enrollments of 2,000 children 
or more each.
    (7) Participation factor means the percentages of children approved 
by the school for free lunches, reduced price lunches, and paid lunches, 
respectively, who are participating in the Program. The free 
participation factor is derived by dividing the number of free lunches 
claimed for any given period by the product of the number of children 
approved for free lunches for the same period times the operating days 
in that period. A similar computation is used to determine the reduced 
price and paid participation factors. The number of children approved 
for paid lunches is derived by subtracting the number of children 
approved for free and reduced price lunches for any given period from 
the total number of children enrolled in the reviewed school for the 
same period of time, if available. If such enrollment figures are not 
available, the most recent total number of children enrolled shall be 
used. If school food authority participation factors are unavailable or 
unreliable, State-wide data shall be employed.
    (8) Review period means the period of time covered by the 
administrative review or follow-up review. The review period is 
specified in paragraph (f)(2) of this section.
    (9) Review threshold means the degree of error in a critical area of 
review which, if exceeded during an administrative review or follow-up 
review of a school food authority, may trigger a follow-up review of 
that school food authority.
    (10) Small school food authority means, in any State, a school food 
authority that participates in the Program and is not a large school 
food authority, as defined in this section.
    (c) Timing of reviews.  The first year of the first 5-year review 
cycle began on July 1, 1992, or as otherwise authorized under paragraph 
(a) of this section and shall end on June 30, 1994. For each State 
agency, the first 5-year review cycle shall end on June 30, 1998. 
Administrative reviews and follow-up reviews shall be conducted as 
follows:
    (1) Administrative reviews. At a minimum, State agencies shall 
conduct administrative reviews of all school food authorities at least 
once during each 5-year review cycle; provided that each school food 
authority is reviewed at least once every 6 years. The on-site portion 
of the administrative review shall be completed during the school year 
in which the review was begun.
    (2) Expanded review cycle. State agencies are encouraged to conduct 
administrative reviews of large school food authorities and of any 
school food authorities which may benefit from a more frequent interval 
than the minimum 5-year cycle required in paragraph (c)(1) of this 
section.

[[Page 43]]

    (3) Exceptions. FCS may, on an individual school food authority 
basis, approve written requests for 1-year extensions to the 6-year 
review interval specified in paragraph (c)(1) of this section if FCS 
determines this requirement conflicts with efficient State agency 
management of the Program.
    (4) Follow-up reviews. The State agency is encouraged to conduct 
first follow-up reviews in the same school year as the administrative 
review; but in no event shall first follow-up reviews be conducted later 
than December 31 of the school year following the administrative review. 
Subsequent follow-up reviews shall be scheduled in accordance with 
paragraph (i)(5) of this section.
    (d) Scheduling school food authorities. The State agency shall use 
its own criteria to schedule school food authorities for administrative 
reviews; provided that the requirements of paragraph (c) of this section 
are met. State agencies are encouraged to take into consideration the 
findings of the claims review process required under Sec. 210.8(b)(2) of 
this part in the selection of school food authorities.
    (1) Schedule of reviews. To ensure no unintended overlap occurs, the 
State agency shall inform FCS of the anticipated schedule of school food 
authority reviews upon request.
    (2) Reporting follow-up review activity. At such time as the State 
agency determines that a follow-up review is needed, the State agency 
shall notify FCS of the names of those large school food authorities 
exceeding any one of the critical area review thresholds specified in 
paragraph (i) of this section.
    (3) Exceptions. In any school year in which FCS or OIG conducts a 
review or investigation of a school food authority in accordance with 
Sec. 210.19(a)(5) of this part, the State agency shall, unless otherwise 
authorized by FCS, delay conduct of a scheduled administrative review 
until the following school year. The State agency shall document any 
exception authorized under this paragraph.
    (e) Number of schools to review.  The State agency is encouraged to 
review all schools meeting the school selection criteria specified in 
paragraph (e)(1) of this section. At a minimum, the State agency shall 
review the number of schools specified in paragraph (e)(1) of this 
section and shall select the schools to be reviewed on the basis of the 
school selection criteria specified in paragraph (e)(2) of this section.
    (1) Minimum number of schools. Except for residential child care 
institutions, the State agency shall review all schools with a free 
average daily participation of 100 or more and a free participation 
factor of 100 percent or more. In no event shall the State agency review 
less than the minimum number of schools illustrated in table A:

                                 Table A                                
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                         Minimum no. of 
     No. of schools in the school food authority         schools to be  
                                                            reviewed    
------------------------------------------------------------------------
  1 to 5.............................................                  1
  6 to 10............................................                  2
 11 to 20............................................                  3
 21 to 40............................................                  4
 41 to 60............................................                  6
 61 to 80............................................                  8
 81 to 100...........................................                 10
101 or more..........................................            \1\ 12 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Twelve plus 5 percent of the number of schools over 100. Fractions  
  shall be rounded to the nearest whole number.                         

    (2) School selection criteria.
    (i) Selection of additional schools to meet the minimum number of 
schools required under paragraph (e)(1) of this section, shall be based 
on the following criteria:
    (A) Elementary schools with a free average daily participation of 
100 or more and a free participation factor of 97 percent or more;
    (B) Secondary schools with a free average daily participation of 100 
or more and a free participation factor of 77 percent or more; and
    (C) Combination schools with a free average daily participation of 
100 or more and a free participation factor of 87 percent or more. A 
combination school means a school with a mixture of elementary and 
secondary grades.
    (ii) When the number of schools selected on the basis of the 
criteria established in paragraph (A) through paragraph (C) of this 
paragraph are not sufficient to meet the minimum number of schools 
required under paragraph (e)(1) of this section, the schools selected 
for review shall be selected on the basis of State agency criteria

[[Page 44]]

which may include low participation schools, recommendations from a food 
service director based on findings from the on-site visits or the claims 
review process required under Sec. 210.8(a) of this part; or any school 
in which the daily lunch counts appear questionable, e.g., identical or 
very similar claiming patterns, and/or large changes in free lunch 
counts.
    (3) Pervasive problems. If the State agency review finds pervasive 
problems in a school food authority, FCS may authorize the State agency 
to cease review activities prior to reviewing the required number of 
schools under paragraph (e)(1) of this section. Where FCS authorizes the 
State agency to cease review activity, FCS may either conduct the review 
activity itself or refer the school food authority to OIG.
    (f) Scope of review. During the course of an administrative review, 
each State agency shall monitor compliance with the critical and general 
areas identified in paragraphs (g) and (h) of this section.
    (1) Review form. State agencies shall use the administrative review 
form prescribed by FCS for the critical areas of review specified in 
paragraph (g) of this section. State agencies may use their own 
administrative review form for the general areas of review specified in 
paragraph (h) of this section.
    (2) Review period.
    (i) The review period for administrative reviews and follow-up 
reviews shall cover, at a minimum, the most recent month for which a 
Claim for Reimbursement was submitted; provided that such Claim for 
Reimbursement covers at least 10 operating days.
    (ii) Subject to FCS approval, the State agency may conduct a review 
early in the school year, prior to the submission of a Claim for 
Reimbursement. In such cases, the review period shall be the prior month 
of operation in the current school year, provided that such month 
includes at least 10 operating days.
    (3) Audit findings. To prevent duplication of effort, the State 
agency may use any recent and currently applicable findings from 
Federally-required audit activity or from any State-imposed audit 
requirements. Such findings may be used only insofar as they pertain to 
the reviewed school(s) or the overall operation of the school food 
authority and they are relevant to the review period. The State agency 
shall document the source and the date of the audit.
    (g) Critical areas of review. The performance standards listed in 
this paragraph are deemed critical since compliance in these areas is 
directly linked to the service of a reimbursable lunch.
    (1) Performance Standard 1 (All free, reduced price and paid lunches 
claimed for reimbursement are served only to children eligible for free, 
reduced price and paid lunches, respectively; and are counted, recorded, 
consolidated and reported through a system which consistently yields 
correct claims.) The State agency shall determine that the free and 
reduced price eligibility determinations are correct. In addition, the 
State agency shall determine that for each day of operation for the 
review period, the number of free, reduced price and paid lunches 
claimed for each reviewed school is not more than the number of lunches 
served to children eligible for free, reduced price and paid lunches, 
respectively, in those schools for the review period. The State agency 
shall also determine that a lunch counting system is being used which 
accurately counts, records, consolidates and reports the reimbursable 
lunches served, by type.
    (i) For each school reviewed, the State agency shall:
    (A) Determine the number of children eligible for free, reduced 
price and paid lunches, by type, for the review period. To make this 
determination:
    (1) The State agency shall:
    (i) Review all approved free and reduced price applications for 
children in the reviewed schools back to the beginning of the school 
year to determine whether each child's application is complete and 
correctly approved in accordance with all applicable provisions of 7 CFR 
part 245; or
    (ii) Review all approved free and reduced price applications 
effective for the review period for children in the reviewed schools; or
    (iii) Review all approved free and reduced price applications 
effective on the day(s) the review is conducted for children in the 
reviewed schools.

[[Page 45]]

    (2) In lieu of reviewing all of the free and reduced price 
applications as required under paragraph (g)(1)(i)(A)(1) of this 
section, the State agency may review a statistically valid sample of 
those applications. If the State agency chooses to review a 
statistically valid sample of applications, the State agency shall 
ensure that the sample size is large enough so that there is a 95 
percent chance that the actual error rate for all applications is not 
less than 2 percentage points less than the error rate found in the 
sample (i.e., the lower bound of the one-sided 95 percent confidence 
interval is no more than 2 percentage points less than the point 
estimate). In addition, the State agency shall determine the need for 
follow-up reviews and base fiscal action upon the error rate found in 
the sample.
    (3) Evaluate whether the previous year's eligibility determinations 
are used after 30 operating days following the first day of school, or 
as otherwise established by the State agency; provided that the State 
agency-developed timeframe does not exceed the 30 operating day limit.
    (4) In the case where child(ren) are determined eligible for free 
lunches based on documentation from the local food stamp or AFDC agency 
which certifies that the child(ren) is currently a member of a household 
receiving benefits under the Food Stamp or AFDC Program, determine that 
the certification from the Food Stamp Program or AFDC Program is 
official; all the information required under Sec. 245.6 of this title is 
complete; and such children were enrolled in the school under review 
during the review period.
    (B) Evaluate the system for issuing benefits and updating 
eligibility status by validating the mechanism(s) the reviewed school 
uses to provide benefits to eligible children, e.g., master list. The 
State agency shall determine whether the system is adequate and, within 
the timeframes established in Sec. 210.7(c)(1)(ii)(B), reflects changes 
due to verification findings, transfers, reported changes in household 
size or income, or from a household's decision to decline school lunch 
benefits or any notification from the household that it is no longer 
certified to receive food stamp or AFDC benefits.
    (C) Determine whether the lunch counting system yields correct 
claims. At a minimum, the State agency shall determine whether:
    (1) The daily lunch counts, by type, for the review period are more 
than the product of the number of children determined by the school/
school food authority to be eligible for free, reduced price, and paid 
lunches for the review period times an attendance factor. If the lunch 
count, for any type, appears questionable or significantly exceeds the 
product of the number of eligibles, for that type, times an attendance 
factor, documentation showing good cause must be available for review by 
the State agency.
    (2) Each type of food service line provides accurate point of 
service lunch counts, by type, and those lunch counts are correctly 
counted and recorded. If an alternative counting system is employed (in 
accordance with Sec. 210.7(c)(2)), the State agency shall ensure that it 
provides accurate counts of reimbursable lunches, by type, and is 
correctly implemented as approved by the State agency.
    (3) All lunches are correctly counted, recorded, consolidated and 
reported for the day they are served.
    (ii) For each school food authority reviewed, the State agency shall 
review lunch count records to ensure that the lunch counts submitted by 
each reviewed school are correctly consolidated, recorded, and reported 
by the school food authority on the Claim for Reimbursement.
    (2) Performance Standard 2 (Lunches claimed for reimbursement within 
the school food authority contain food items/components as required by 
Program regulations.) For each school reviewed, the State agency shall:
    (i) For the day of the review, observe the serving line(s) to 
determine whether all required food items/components are offered.
    (ii) For the day of the review, observe a significant number of the 
Program lunches counted at the point of service for each type of serving 
line, to determine whether those lunches contain the required number of 
food items/components.
    (iii) Review menu records for the review period to determine whether 
all

[[Page 46]]

required food items/components have been offered.
    (h) General areas of review. The general areas listed in this 
paragraph reflect major Program requirements. The general areas of 
review shall include, but are not limited to, the following areas:
    (1) Free and reduced price process. In the course of the review of 
each school food authority, the State agency shall:
    (i) Review the implementation of the free and reduced price policy 
statement to ensure it is implemented as approved.
    (ii) Evaluate whether the required minimum number of applications 
are verified with respect to the selection method used.
    (iii) Determine that applications for verification are selected 
through random or focused sampling in accordance with the provisions of 
Sec. 245.6a of this title and FCS Instructions, and that no 
discrimination exists in the selection process.
    (iv) Establish that verification is completed by December 15. If the 
administrative review occurs prior to the December 15 deadline, the 
State agency shall evaluate the verification activities that have 
occurred to date and assess whether these activities represent a good 
faith effort that will result in compliance with the requirements of 
Sec. 245.6a of this title.
    (v) Confirm that the verification process is complete for each 
application verified by or on behalf of the reviewed schools. 
Verification is considered complete either when a child's eligibility 
for the level of benefits for which he or she was approved is confirmed, 
changed to a higher level of benefit, or a letter of adverse action has 
been sent.
    (vi) Ensure that verification records are maintained as required by 
Sec. 245.6a(c) of this title.
    (vii) Determine that, for each reviewed school, the lunch count 
system does not overtly identify children eligible for free and reduced 
price lunches.
    (viii) Review a representative sample of denied applications to 
evaluate whether the determining official correctly denied applicants 
for free and reduced price lunches.
    (2) Food quantities. For each school reviewed, the State agency 
shall observe a significant number of Program lunches counted at the 
point of service for each type of serving line to determine whether 
those lunches appear to provide food items/components in the quantities 
required under Sec. 210.10 or Sec. 210.10a, in whichever is applicable. 
If visual observation suggests that quantities are insufficient, the 
State agency shall require the reviewed schools to provide documentation 
demonstrating that the required amounts of food were available for 
service for each day of the review period.
    (3) Civil rights. The State agency shall examine the school food 
authority's compliance with the civil rights provisions specified in 
Sec. 210.23(b) of this part.
    (4) Monitoring responsibilities. The State agency shall ensure that 
the school food authority conducts on-site reviews in accordance with 
Sec. 210.8(a)(1) of this part and monitors claims in accordance with 
Sec. 210.8(a)(2) and (a)(3) of this part.
    (5) Reporting and recordkeeping. The State agency shall determine 
that the school food authority submits reports and maintains records as 
required under 7 CFR parts 210 and 245.
    (i) Follow-up reviews. All school food authorities found to have a 
critical area violation in excess of any one of the review thresholds 
specified in this paragraph are subject to follow-up reviews. State 
agencies shall notify FCS of the names of large school food authorities 
exceeding critical area review thresholds in accordance with paragraph 
(d)(2) of this section. The State agency shall conduct a first follow-up 
review of any large school food authority found on an administrative 
review to have critical area violations in excess of any one of the 
review thresholds. State agencies shall also conduct a first follow-up 
review of at least 25 percent of the small school food authorities found 
on a review to have critical area violations in excess of any one of the 
review thresholds. State agencies shall conduct additional follow-up 
reviews of any school food authority which has a critical area violation 
exceeding a review threshold on the first follow-up or any subsequent 
follow-up review regardless of whether

[[Page 47]]

such review is conducted by FCS or the State agency.
    (1) Selection of small school food authorities. In determining which 
small school food authorities to include in the follow-up review sample, 
State agencies shall select those school food authorities which have the 
most serious problems, including, but not limited to, systemic 
accountability problems, large overclaims, significant lunch pattern 
violations, etc.
    (2) Selection of schools.
    (i) If the critical area violation(s) responsible for follow-up 
review activity are limited to school food authority level problems 
(e.g. centralized application processing or centralized kitchen), the 
State agency may limit the follow-up review to the school food authority 
level.
    (ii) If the critical area violation(s) responsible for follow-up 
review activity were identified in the review of a school(s), then State 
agencies shall review at least the minimum number of schools required 
under paragraph (e)(1) of this section. State agencies shall meet the 
minimum number of schools requirement by selecting those schools found, 
on a previous review, to have significant critical area violations. If 
any additional schools must be selected to meet the minimum required 
number, the State agency shall select from those schools which meet 
State agency-developed criteria identified under paragraph (e)(2)(ii) of 
this section.
    (3) Review thresholds. The review thresholds apply only to the 
critical areas of review and are designed to limit follow-up reviews to 
those school food authorities with serious problems. The provisions of 
paragraph (i) of this section apply when:
    (i) For Performance Standard 1--
    (A) a number of the reviewed schools in a school food authority, as 
specified in Table B, have an inadequate system for certification, 
issuing benefits or updating eligibility status; or for counting, 
recording, consolidating or reporting lunches, by type; or
    (B) the school food authority has an inadequate system for 
consolidating lunch counts, by type, or for reporting claims; or, if 
applicable, for certification, issuing benefits or updating eligibility 
status.
At the school and school food authority level, a system for 
certification, issuing benefits or updating eligibility status is 
inadequate if 10 percent or more (but not less than 10 lunches) of the 
free and reduced price lunches claimed for the review period (for any 
school reviewed) are claimed incorrectly due to errors of certification, 
benefit issuance or updating of eligibility status.

                                 Table B                                
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                              Number of 
                                                               schools  
                Number of schools reviewed                    violating 
                                                             performance
                                                             standard 1 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1 to 5....................................................            1 
6 to 10...................................................            2 
11 to 20..................................................            3 
21 to 30..................................................            4 
31 to 40..................................................            5 
41 to 50..................................................            6 
51 to 60..................................................            7 
61 to 70..................................................            8 
71 to 80..................................................            9 
81 to 90..................................................           10 
91 to 100.................................................           11 
101 or more...............................................           11*
------------------------------------------------------------------------
* 11 plus the number identified above for the appropriate increment.    

    (ii) For Performance Standard 2-10 percent or more of the total 
number of Program lunches observed in a school food authority are 
missing one or more of the required food items/components.
    (4) Scope of follow-up reviews. On any follow-up review, the State 
agency is encouraged to review all of the critical and general areas of 
review specified in paragraph (g) and (h) of this section for those 
schools which were not reviewed during the administrative review. At a 
minimum, the State agency shall:
    (i) For each school selected for review (or for the school food 
authority, as applicable,) review the critical areas for which the 
review thresholds were exceeded by the school food authority on a 
previous review;
    (ii) Determine whether the school food authority has satisfactorily 
completed the corrective actions in accordance with paragraph (k) of 
this section required for both critical and general areas within the 
timeframes established by the State agency;
    (iii) Evaluate whether these corrective actions resolved the 
problem(s); and

[[Page 48]]

    (iv) If the State agency did not evaluate the certification, count 
and milk/meal service procedures for the School Breakfast Program (7 CFR 
part 220) and/or the Special Milk Program for Children (7 CFR part 215) 
or offering meal supplements in after hour care programs (7 CFR part 
210) in those schools selected for the administrative review and 
participating in those Programs, the State agency shall do so for those 
schools selected for the first follow-up review.
    (5) Critical area violations identified in a follow-up review. 
Critical area violations identified on a follow-up review shall be 
addressed as follows:
    (i) If, during a follow-up review, the State agency determines, that 
corrective actions have not been satisfactorily completed in accordance 
with the documented corrective action, the State agency shall: require 
the school food authority to resolve the problems and to submit 
documented corrective action to the State agency ; take fiscal action 
for critical area violations as specified in paragraph (m) of this 
section; and withhold Program payments in accordance with paragraph (l) 
of this section, until such time as a follow-up review, requested by the 
school food authority, indicates the problem has been corrected. If the 
State agency determines that the corrective actions have been completed 
as specified in the documented corrective action, but those corrective 
actions do not effectively resolve the problem, the State agency shall 
follow the requirements for new critical area violations specified in 
paragraphs (i)(5)(ii) and (iii) of this section.
    (ii) If new critical area violations are observed that exceed a 
review threshold, the State agency shall: Require the school food 
authority to resolve the problems and to submit documented corrective 
action to the State agency; take fiscal action as specified in paragraph 
(m) of this section; and conduct a follow-up review within 6 operating 
months of the first follow-up review.
    (iii) If new critical area violations are observed which do not 
exceed review thresholds, the State agency shall: Require the school 
food authority to resolve the problem and to submit documented 
corrective action to the State agency within specified timeframes; and 
take fiscal action in accordance with paragraph (m) of this section. If 
adequate documented corrective action is not received within those 
timeframes, the State agency shall withhold Program payments in 
accordance with paragraph (l) of this section, until such time as 
adequate documented corrective action is received.
    (6) General area violations identified in a follow-up review. 
General area violations identified in a follow-up review shall be 
addressed as follows:
    (i) If, during a follow-up review, the State agency determines that 
corrective actions have not been taken in accordance with the documented 
corrective action, the State agency shall withhold Program payments in 
accordance with paragraph (l) of this section, until such time as the 
State agency receives adequate documented corrective action.
    (ii) If the State agency determines that the corrective actions 
taken did not effectively resolve the problem, or if new general area 
violations are observed on a follow-up review, the State agency shall 
require the school food authority to resolve the problem and to submit 
documented corrective action to the State agency within specified 
timeframes. If adequate documented corrective action is not received 
within those timeframes, the State agency shall withhold Program 
payments in accordance with paragraph (l) of this section, until such 
time as adequate documented corrective action is received.
    (7) Exceptions. FCS may, on an individual school food authority 
basis, approve written requests for exceptions to the follow-up review 
requirement specified in paragraph (i)(1) of this section if FCS 
determines that the requirement conflicts with efficient State agency 
management of the program.
    (j) Exit conference and notification. The State agency shall hold an 
exit conference at the close of the administrative review and of any 
subsequent follow-up review to discuss the violations observed, the 
extent of the violations and a preliminary assessment of

[[Page 49]]

the actions needed to correct the violations. The State agency shall 
discuss an appropriate deadline(s) for completion of corrective action, 
provided that the deadline(s) results in the completion of corrective 
action on a timely basis. After every review, the State agency shall 
provide written notification of the review findings to the school food 
authority's Superintendent (or equivalent in a non-public school food 
authority) or authorized representative. The written notification shall 
include the review findings, the needed corrective actions, the 
deadlines for completion of the corrective action, and the potential 
fiscal action. As a part of the denial of all or a part of a Claim for 
Reimbursement or withholding payment in accordance with the provisions 
of this section, the State agency shall provide the school food 
authority a written notice which details the grounds on which the denial 
of all or a part of the Claim for Reimbursement or withholding payment 
is based. This notice, which shall be sent by certified mail, return 
receipt requested, shall also include a statement indicating that the 
school food authority may appeal the denial of all or a part of a Claim 
for Reimbursement or withholding payment and the entity (i.e., FCS or 
State agency) to which the appeal should be directed. The State agency 
shall notify the school food authority, in writing, of the appeal 
procedures as specified in Sec. 210.18(q) for appeals of State agency 
findings, and for appeals of FCS findings, provide a copy of 
Sec. 210.30(d)(3) of the regulations.
    (k) Corrective action. Corrective action is required for any 
violation under either the critical or general areas of the review. 
Corrective action shall be applied to all schools in the school food 
authority, as appropriate, to ensure that previously deficient practices 
and procedures are revised system-wide.
    Corrective actions may include training, technical assistance, 
recalculation of data to ensure the correctness of any claim that the 
school food authority is preparing at the time of the review, or other 
actions. Fiscal action shall be taken in accordance with paragraph (m) 
of this section.
    (1) Extensions of the timeframes. If extraordinary circumstances 
arise where a school food authority is unable to complete the required 
corrective action within the timeframes specified by the State agency, 
the State agency may extend the timeframes upon written request of the 
school food authority.
    (2) Documented corrective action. Documented corrective action is 
required for any degree of violation of general or critical areas 
identified in an administrative review or on any follow-up review. 
Documented corrective action may be provided at the time of the review; 
however, it shall be postmarked or submitted to the State agency no 
later than 30 days from the deadline for completion of each required 
corrective action, as specified under paragraph (j) of this section or 
as otherwise extended by the State agency under paragraph (k)(1) of this 
section. The State agency shall maintain any documented corrective 
action on file for review by FCS.
    (l) Withholding payment. At a minimum, the State agency shall 
withhold Program payments to a school food authority as follows:
    (1) Cause. (i) The State agency shall withhold all Program payments 
to a school food authority if documented corrective action for critical 
area violation(s) which exceed the review threshold(s) is not provided 
within the deadlines specified in paragraph (k)(2) of this section; and/
or
    (ii) The State agency shall withhold all Program payments to a 
school food authority if, in the event that a follow-up review is not 
conducted, the State agency finds that corrective action for a critical 
area violation which exceeded the review threshold was not completed 
within the deadlines specified in paragraph (j) of this section or as 
otherwise extended by the State agency under paragraph (k)(1) of this 
section; and/or
    (iii) The State agency shall withhold all Program payments to a 
school food authority if, on a follow-up review, the State agency finds 
a critical area violation which exceeded the review threshold on a 
previous review and continues to exceed the review threshold on a 
follow-up review.
    (iv) The State agency may withhold payments at its discretion, if 
the State

[[Page 50]]

agency finds that documented corrective action is not provided within 
the deadlines specified in paragraph (k)(2) of this section, that 
corrective action is not complete or that corrective action was not 
taken as specified in the documented corrective action for a general 
area violation or for a critical area violation which did not exceed the 
review threshold.
    (2) Duration. In all cases, Program payments shall be withheld until 
such time as corrective action is completed, and documented corrective 
action is received and deemed acceptable by the State agency or as 
otherwise specified in paragraph (i)(5) of this section. Subsequent to 
the State agency's acceptance of the corrective actions (and a follow-up 
review, when required), payments will be released for all lunches served 
in accordance with the provisions of this part during the period the 
payments were withheld. In very serious cases, the State agency will 
evaluate whether the degree of non-compliance warrants termination in 
accordance with Sec. 210.25 of this part.
    (3) Exceptions. The State agency may, at its discretion, reduce the 
amount required to be withheld from a school food authority pursuant to 
paragraph (l)(1)(i) through (iii) of this section by as much as 60 
percent of the total Program payments when it is determined to be in the 
best interest of the Program. FCS may authorize a State agency to limit 
withholding of funds to an amount less than 40 percent of the total 
Program payments, if FCS determines such action to be in the best 
interest of the Program.
    (4) Failure to withhold payments. FCS may suspend or withhold 
Program payments, in whole or in part, to those State agencies failing 
to withhold Program payments in accordance with paragraph (l)(1) of this 
section and may withhold administrative funds in accordance with 
Sec. 235.11(b) of this title. The withholding of Program payments will 
remain in effect until such time as the State agency documents 
compliance with paragraph (l)(1) of this section to FCS. Subsequent to 
the documentation of compliance, any withheld administrative funds will 
be released and payment will be released for any lunches served in 
accordance with the provisions of this part during the period the 
payments were withheld.
    (m) Fiscal action. For purposes of the critical areas of the 
administrative review and any follow-up reviews, fiscal action is 
required for all violations of Performance Standards 1 and 2. Except 
that, on an administrative review, the State agency may limit fiscal 
action from the point corrective action occurs back through the 
beginning of the review period for errors identified under paragraphs 
(g)(1)(i)(A) and (g)(1)(i)(B) of this section, provided corrective 
action occurs. Fiscal action shall be taken in accordance with the 
provisions identified under Sec. 210.19(c) of this part.
    (n) Miscellaneous reporting requirement. Each State agency shall 
report to FCS the results of reviews by March 1 of each school year, on 
a form designated by FCS. In such annual reports, the State agency shall 
include the results of all administrative reviews and follow-up reviews 
conducted in the preceding school year.
    (o) Summary of reporting requirements. Each State agency shall 
report to FCS:
    (1) The names of those large school food authorities exceeding any 
one of the critical area review thresholds as described in paragraph 
(d)(2) of this section.
    (2) The results of reviews by March 1 of each school year on a form 
designated by FCS, as specified under paragraph (n) of this section.
    (p) Recordkeeping. Each State agency shall keep records which 
document the details of all reviews and demonstrate the degree of 
compliance with the critical and general areas of review. Records shall 
be retained by the State agency as specified in Sec. 210.23(c) of this 
part. Such records shall include documentation of administrative reviews 
and follow-up reviews. As appropriate, the records shall include 
documented corrective action, and documentation of withholding of 
payments and fiscal action, including recoveries made. Additionally, the 
State agency must have on file:
    (1) Criteria for selecting schools on first and follow-up reviews in 
accordance with paragraphs (e)(2)(ii) and (i)(2)(ii) of this section.

[[Page 51]]

    (2) Its system for selecting small school food authorities for 
follow-up reviews in accordance with paragraph (i)(1) of this section.
    (3) Documentation demonstrating compliance with the statistical 
sampling requirements in accordance with paragraph (g)(1)(i)(A)(1) of 
this section, if applicable.
    (q) School food authority appeal of State agency findings. Except 
for FCS-conducted reviews authorized under Sec. 210.30(d)(2) of this 
part, each State agency shall establish an appeal procedure to be 
followed by a school food authority requesting a review of a denial of 
all or a part of the Claim for Reimbursement or withholding payment 
arising from administrative or follow-up review activity conducted by 
the State agency under Sec. 210.18 of this part. State agencies may use 
their own appeal procedures provided the same procedures are applied to 
all appellants in the State and the procedures meet the following 
requirements: appellants are assured of a fair and impartial hearing 
before an independent official at which they may be represented by legal 
counsel; decisions are rendered in a timely manner not to exceed 120 
days from the date of the receipt of the request for review; appellants 
are afforded the right to either a review of the record with the right 
to file written information, or a hearing which they may attend in 
person; and adequate notice is given of the time, date, place and 
procedures of the hearing. If the State agency has not established its 
own appeal procedures or the procedures do not meet the above listed 
criteria, the State agency shall observe the following procedures at a 
minimum:
    (1) The written request for a review shall be postmarked within 15 
calendar days of the date the appellant received the notice of the 
denial of all or a part of the Claim for Reimbursement or withholding of 
payment, and the State agency shall acknowledge the receipt of the 
request for appeal within 10 calendar days;
    (2) The appellant may refute the action specified in the notice in 
person and by written documentation to the review official. In order to 
be considered, written documentation must be filed with the review 
official not later than 30 calendar days after the appellant received 
the notice. The appellant may retain legal counsel, or may be 
represented by another person. A hearing shall be held by the review 
official in addition to, or in lieu of, a review of written information 
submitted by the appellant only if the appellant so specifies in the 
letter of request for review. Failure of the appellant school food 
authority's representative to appear at a scheduled hearing shall 
constitute the appellant school food authority's waiver of the right to 
a personal appearance before the review official, unless the review 
official agrees to reschedule the hearing. A representative of the State 
agency shall be allowed to attend the hearing to respond to the 
appellant's testimony and to answer questions posed by the review 
official;
    (3) If the appellant has requested a hearing, the appellant and the 
State agency shall be provided with at least 10 calendar days advance 
written notice, sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the 
time, date and place of the hearing;
    (4) Any information on which the State agency's action was based 
shall be available to the appellant for inspection from the date of 
receipt of the request for review;
    (5) The review official shall be an independent and impartial 
official other than, and not accountable to, any person authorized to 
make decisions that are subject to appeal under the provisions of this 
section;
    (6) The review official shall make a determination based on 
information provided by the State agency and the appellant, and on 
Program regulations;
    (7) Within 60 calendar days of the State agency's receipt of the 
request for review, by written notice, sent by certified mail, return 
receipt requested, the review official shall inform the State agency and 
the appellant of the determination of the review official. The final 
determination shall take effect upon receipt of the written notice of 
the final decision by the school food authority;
    (8) The State agency's action shall remain in effect during the 
appeal process;

[[Page 52]]

    (9) The determination by the State review official is the final 
administrative determination to be afforded to the appellant.
    (r) FCS review activity. The term ``State agency'' and all the 
provisions specified in paragraphs (a)-(h) of this section refer to FCS 
when FCS conducts administrative reviews or follow-up reviews in 
accordance with Sec. 210.30(d)(2) of this part. FCS will notify the 
State agency of the review findings and the need for corrective action 
and fiscal action. The State agency shall pursue any needed follow-up 
activity.

[56 FR 32942, July 17, 1991; 56 FR 55527, Oct. 28, 1991, as amended at 
57 FR 38584, Aug. 26, 1992; 57 FR 40729, Sept. 4, 1992; 59 FR 1894, Jan. 
13, 1994; 60 FR 31215, June 13, 1995; 60 FR 57147, Nov. 14, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 210.18a  Assessment, improvement and monitoring system.

    (a) Effective date. The provisions of this section are effective 
through June 30, 1992.
    (b) Assessment, Improvement and Monitoring System (AIMS). Each State 
agency shall perform AIMS reviews, audits or a combination thereof of 
all school food authorities participating in the Program in accordance 
with the provisions of this section; or a State agency may develop an 
alternate monitoring system as specified in paragraph (j) of this 
section.
    (c) AIMS definitions. The following definitions are provided in 
order to clarify AIMS requirements:
    (1) AIMS means the Assessment, Improvement and Monitoring System. 
This is a management improvement system used in the National School 
Lunch and Commodity School Programs.
    (2) AIMS audits means on-site evaluations of school food authorities 
participating in the Program for compliance with AIMS performance 
standards, by State auditors or State contracted auditors once every 2 
years, in accordance with USDA's audit guide or an audit guide approved 
by FCS and USDA's OIG.
    (3) AIMS performance standards means the following standards which 
measure compliance with Program regulations:
    (i) Performance Standard 1--Certification--Within the school food 
authority, each child's application for free and reduced price meals is 
correctly approved or denied in accordance with the applicable 
provisions of part 245.
    (ii) Performance Standard 2--Claims--The number of free and reduced 
price meals claimed for reimbursement by each school for any period are, 
in each case, equal to the number of meals which are served to children 
who are correctly approved for free and for reduced price meals, 
respectively, during the period.
    (iii) Performance Standard 3--Counting--The system used for counting 
and recording meal totals, by type, claimed for reimbursement at both 
the school food authority and school levels yields correct claims.
    (iv) Performance Standard 4--Components--Meals claimed for 
reimbursement within the school food authority contain food items as 
required by Sec. 210.10.
    (4) AIMS reviews means on-site evaluation, of all school food 
authorities participating in the Program during each 4-year AIMS review 
period, by the State agency or State auditors for compliance with the 
AIMS performance standards and follow-up reviews, as required.
    (5) Corrective action plan means the written description a school 
food authority submits to the State agency to explain how and when a 
program deficiency will be corrected.
    (6) Large school food authority means, in any State:
    (i) All school food authorities that participate in the Program and 
have enrollments of 40,000 students or more each; and
    (ii) The two largest school food authorities that participate in the 
Program and have enrollments of 2,000 students or more each.
    (7) Second review thresholds means the degree of error of an AIMS 
performance standard as specified in paragraph (e)(4) of this section 
which, if exceeded in a reviewed school food authority, triggers a 
second AIMS review in all large school food authorities and in at least 
25 percent of those small school food authorities which exceed second 
review thresholds on a first review.

[[Page 53]]

    (8) Small school food authority means, in any State, a school food 
authority that participates in the Program and is not a large school 
food authority.
    (d) Number of schools reviewed or audited under AIMS. The number of 
schools within the school food authority which must be included in a 
review or audit is dependent upon the total number of schools in the 
school food authority. The minimum number of schools the State agency 
shall review or audit is illustrated in Table A:

                                 Table A                                
------------------------------------------------------------------------
       Number of schools in the school food authority         Minimum\1\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1 to 5.....................................................            1
6 to 10....................................................            2
11 to 20...................................................            3
21 to 40...................................................            4
41 to 60...................................................            6
61 to 80...................................................            8
81 to 100..................................................           10
101 or more................................................        \2\12
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  Minimum number of schools to be reviewed or audited.               
\2\ Twelve plus 5 percent of the number of schools over 100. Fractions  
  shall be rounded to the nearest whole number.                         

    (e) AIMS reviews. States performing AIMS reviews shall monitor 
compliance with the AIMS performance standards described in paragraph 
(c) of this section. On the first AIMS review, the State agency shall 
review the school food authority for Performance Standards 1-4. On 
second AIMS reviews, the State agency shall, at a minimum, review the 
school food authority for the performance standards which exceeded 
second review thresholds in the first review.
    (1) Scope of AIMS reviews. In reviewing performance standards:
    (i) The State agency shall analyze and determine the adequacy of 
local approval procedures for free and reduced price meals by examining 
the eligibility determinations made within the school food authority. 
The State agency shall review the applications for all children for whom 
application was made attending the reviewed schools, or a statistically 
valid sample of the applications for such children. The State agency 
shall also ensure that the system to update the application file is 
adequate. If the State agency chooses to review a statistically valid 
sample of applications, the State agency shall ensure that the sample 
size is large enough so that there is a 95 percent chance that the 
actual error rate for all applications is not less than 2 percentage 
points less than the error rate found in the sample (i.e., the lower 
bound of the one-sided 95 percent confidence interval is no more than 2 
percentage points less than the point estimate). In addition, the State 
agency shall determine the need for a second review and base fiscal 
action upon the error rate found in the sample.
    (ii) The State agency shall determine that, for each school 
reviewed, the number of free and reduced price meals claimed for each 
day of the most recent month for which the school food authority has 
submitted a claim are equal to the number of meals served to eligible 
children for that claiming month. In order to make this determination, 
State agencies shall review the data required to be maintained by the 
school food authority under Sec. 210.8(a) and observe the meal counting 
and claiming procedures employed by each school reviewed.
    (iii) The State agency shall ensure that each school reviewed has an 
adequate system for counting and claiming meals served by reimbursement 
type. An adequate system is one which meets the following objectives:
    (A) Provides accurate counts of the number of reimbursable free, 
reduced price and paid meals served to eligible children on a daily 
basis;
    (B) Accurately records and reports those counts to the school food 
authority;
    (C) Prevents the overt identification of free and reduced price meal 
recipients in accordance with 7 CFR part 245; and
    (D) Is monitored by the school food authority in accordance with 
Sec. 210.8(a) to ensure that internal controls exist.
    State agencies shall review each system to determine whether counts 
are taken at the point of service and whether the counting and claiming 
system, as implemented, meets these objectives. If an alternative 
counting system is employed, State agencies shall ensure that it 
achieves the desired objectives, is correctly implemented and is 
approved by the State agency. The State agency shall also ensure that 
the school food authority properly consolidates meal counts from its 
schools.

[[Page 54]]

    (iv) The State agency shall determine by observation of a 
representative sample of meals that meals contain food items as required 
in Sec. 210.10.
    (2) Timing of AIMS reviews. During each 4-year AIMS review period, 
the first AIMS review of a school food authority shall be completed 
within the school year in which the review was begun. A second AIMS 
review, when required, is recommended to be conducted in the same school 
year as the first review and is required to be conducted no later than 
December 31 of the school year following the first review.
    (3) Method of selecting school food authorities and schools to 
review. (i) Each school year, the State agency shall use its own 
criteria to select school food authorities for AIMS reviews; provided 
that all participating school food authorities are reviewed at least 
once every 4 years and that school food authorities found on the first 
review to exceed second review thresholds are subject to second reviews 
as specified in paragraph (e)(4) of this section.
    (ii) On a first AIMS review of a school food authority, the State 
agency shall select the required minimum number of schools to review 
from those which consistently claim that a high proportion of children 
eligible for free or reduced price meals have been served. However, if 
the State agency has reason to believe that this criterion will not lead 
to a review of problem schools, the State agency shall substitute 
schools with the likelihood of problems. The State's reasons for 
substitution shall be kept on file at the State agency and will be 
subject to review by FCSRO.
    (4) Second review thresholds. State agencies shall ensure that 
corrective action plans are completed by all school food authorities 
which are found on first reviews to exceed the second review thresholds 
described below. Further, State agencies shall conduct second reviews 
of: All large school food authorities found to exceed the second review 
thresholds on first reviews; and at least 25 percent of small school 
food authorities found to exceed those thresholds on first reviews. In 
determining which small school food authorities to include in the second 
review sample, State agencies shall, at a minimum, select those school 
food authorities which have the most serious problems on the first 
review. A second review threshold is exceeded when:
    (i) For AIMS Performance Standard 1, 10 percent or more (but not 
less than 10 children) of the children listed on reviewed applications 
and attending reviewed schools in a school food authority are 
incorrectly approved or denied for free or reduced price meal benefits; 
and/or
    (ii) For AIMS Performance Standard 2, a number of schools reviewed 
in a school food authority, as specified in Table B of paragraph (e)(5) 
of this section, claim reimbursement for more free or more reduced price 
meals, respectively, than the number of children correctly approved for 
such meals for the review period times the days of operation times the 
attendance factor used by the school food authority under Sec. 210.8(a); 
and or
    (iii) For AIMS Performance Standard 3, a number of schools reviewed 
in a school food authority, as specified in Table B of paragraph (e)(5), 
have an inadequate system for counting and recording meal totals by type 
claimed for reimbursement, or the school food authority does not use 
valid procedures for consolidating claims; and/or
    (iv) For AIMS Performance Standard 4, 10 percent or more of the 
total meals observed in a school food authority are missing one or more 
required food items.
    (5) Performance standards 2 and 3 thresholds. Table B indicates the 
number of schools violating Performance Standards 2 or 3, thus 
necessitating a corrective action plan in the applicable school food 
authority and a second review in all large school authorities and at 
least 25 percent of the small school food authorities which exceed 
second review thresholds on a first AIMS review.

                                 Table B                                
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                              Number of 
                 Number of schools reviewed                   schools\1\
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1 to 10....................................................            1
11 to 20...................................................            2
21 to 30...................................................            3
31 to 40...................................................            4
41 to 50...................................................            5
51 to 60...................................................            6

[[Page 55]]

                                                                        
61 to 70...................................................           71
7 to 80....................................................            8
81 to 90...................................................            9
91 to 100..................................................           10
101 or more................................................        \2\10
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\Number of schools violating Performance Standards 2 or 3             
  respectively, thus necessitating a second review of the school food   
  authority.                                                            
\2\10 plus the number identified above for the appropriate increment.   

    (6) Corrective action plans for AIMS reviews. Corrective action 
plans are required to address AIMS performance standard deficiencies 
exceeding the second review thresholds described in this section. The 
following procedures shall be followed to develop a corrective action 
plan:
    (i) The State agency shall assist the school food authority in 
developing a mutually agreed upon corrective action plan.
    (ii) The corrective action plan shall identify the corrective 
actions and timeframes needed to correct the deficiencies found during 
the review. Corrective action shall include all necessary fiscal actions 
as described in Sec. 210.19(c), including adjusting data to be used in 
preparing the Claim for Reimbursement.
    (iii) The plan shall be written, signed by the proper official of 
the school food authority, and submitted to and approved by the State 
agency within 60 days following the exit conference of a review. State 
agencies may extend this deadline to 90 days. Extensions beyond 90 days 
may be made, for cause, with written justification to and approval by 
FCSRO.
    (iv) The State agency shall require the school food authority to 
implement an amended or extended corrective action plan when second 
review thresholds are exceeded on a second AIMS review.
    (7) New violations found on a second AIMS review. If, during the 
course of a second AIMS review, a performance standard violation is 
found that has not been noted on a previous AIMS review, the State 
agency shall institute and document appropriate corrective action. If 
the violation exceeds the second review threshold, the State agency 
shall require a corrective action plan and the completion of corrective 
action. The State agency shall take fiscal action as described in 
Sec. 210.19(c) of this part for any degree of violation of AIMS 
Performance Standards 2, 3, and 4.
    (f) AIMS audits. Audits by State agency, State or State-contracted 
auditors may be used as an alternative to AIMS reviews. if the State 
agency chooses this option, the audit must ensure that the four 
performance standards listed under paragraph (c) of this section are 
being complied with by the audited school food authority. This includes 
performing all activities described in paragraph (e)(1) of this section. 
Additionally, a State using AIMS audits in place of AIMS reviews shall:
    (1) Audit school food authorities once every 2 years;
    (2) Take fiscal action in accordance with Sec. 210.19(c);
    (3) Have a documented system for achieving corrective action;
    (4) Select schools within a school food authority based upon 
generally accepted audit principles; and
    (5) Use a State audit guide approved by FCS. A State agency shall 
submit its guide to FCSRO by February 1 of each year; except that 
portions of the guide which do not change annually need not be 
resubmitted. State agencies shall provide the title of the sections that 
remain unchanged, as well as the year of the last guide in which the 
sections were submitted.
    (g) AIMS exit conference, notification and corrective action. The 
State agency and the school food authority shall hold an exit conference 
at the close of an AIMS review or audit to discuss the deficiencies 
observed, the extent of the deficiencies and the corrective action 
needed to correct the deficiencies. If a corrective action plan is 
required as described in paragraph (e)(6) of this seciton, it shall be 
discussed during the exit conference. After every AIMS review or audit, 
the State shall provide written notification of the review or audit 
findings to the school food authority's superintendent or authorized 
representative who signed the State agency/school food authority 
agreement or who is otherwise authorized to represent the 
superintendent. The State shall require that the school

[[Page 56]]

food authority take and document corrective action for any program 
deficiency found on any review or audit. Corrective action may include 
training, assistance, recalculation of data to ensure the correctness of 
any claim that the school food authority is preparing at the time of the 
review, or other actions.
    (h) AIMS reporting. Each State agency shall report to FCSRO:
    (1) The name of any school food authority which exceeds a second 
review on a second AIMS review in any review period and the type and 
extent of the regulatory violations; and
    (2) Beginning March 1, 1989, the results of AIMS reviews/audits by 
March 1 of each school year, on a form designated by FCS. In such annual 
reports, the State agency shall include the results of all AIMS reviews/
audits conducted in the preceding school year and any consequent second 
AIMS reviews performed in the preceding school year or by December 31 of 
the current school year.
    (i) AIMS recordkeeping. Each State agency shall keep records which 
document the details of all AIMS reviews or audits and demonstrate the 
degree of compliance with AIMS performance standards. AIMS records shall 
be kept on file by the State agency for a minimum of 3 years after the 
end of the school year in which the review or audit was conducted or 
after the school year in which problems have been resolved, whichever is 
later. Such records shall include documentation of AIMS first reviews 
and any consequent second reviews. When necessary, the records must 
include a corrective action plan as described in this section. 
Additionally, the State agency must have on file:
    (1) Criteria for selecting schools on first and second reviews;
    (2) Its system for selecting small school food authorities for 
second reviews; and
    (3) Documentation demonstrating compliance with the statistical 
sampling requirements specified in paragraph (e) of this section.
    (j) State alternate to AIMS. Any State developed monitoring system 
shall:
    (1) Be equivalent to AIMS in scope;
    (2) Monitor compliance with AIMS Performance Standards 1-4;
    (3) Include on-site visits of all school food authorities on a 
cyclical basis;
    (4) Require that corrective action be taken and documented for any 
Program deficiency found;
    (5) Require that fiscal action is taken on any reviews where 
deficiencies are found and set forth the State agency's criteria for 
taking fiscal action.
    (6) Provide for the maintenance of a detailed description of the 
system and records of all monitoring visits and activities which 
demonstrate the degree of compliance with AIMS performance standards, 
corrective action needed and taken, and fiscal action taken;
    (7) Receive approval by the appropriate FCSRO prior to 
implementation; and
    (8) Beginning March 1, 1989, submit annual reports of the results of 
such alternate State monitoring reviews to FCSRO on a form designated by 
FCS.

[53 FR 29147, Aug. 2, 1988, as amended at 54 FR 12582, Mar. 28, 1989. 
Redesignated at 56 FR 32942, July 17, 1991, and amended at 56 FR 32947, 
July 17, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 210.19  Additional responsibilities.

    (a) General Program management. Each State agency shall provide an 
adequate number of consultative, technical and managerial personnel to 
administer programs and monitor performance in complying with all 
Program requirements.
    (1) Compliance with nutrition standards. Beginning with School Year 
1996-1997 (unless the school food authority has an implementation waiver 
as provided in Sec. 210.10(o)), State agencies shall evaluate 
compliance, over the school week, with the nutrition standards in 
Sec. 210.10(b) and Sec. 210.10(c) or (d), whichever is applicable. At a 
minimum, these evaluations shall be conducted once every 5 years and may 
be conducted at the same time a school food authority is scheduled for 
an administrative review in accordance with Sec. 210.18. State agencies 
may also conduct these evaluations in conjunction with technical 
assistance visits, other reviews, or separately. The type of evaluation 
conducted by the State agency shall be determined by the

[[Page 57]]

menu planning alternative chosen by the school food authority.
    (i) For school food authorities choosing the nutrient standard menu 
planning or assisted nutrient standard menu planning options provided in 
Sec. 210.10(i) and Sec. 210.10(j), respectively, the State agency shall 
assess the nutrient analysis for the last completed school week prior to 
the review period to determine if the school food authority is applying 
the methodology in Sec. 210.10(i) or Sec. 210.10(j), as appropriate. 
Part of this assessment shall be an independent review of menus and 
production records to determine if they correspond to the analysis 
conducted by the school food authority and if the menu, as offered, over 
a school week, corresponds to the nutrition standards set forth in 
Sec. 210.10(b) and the appropriate calorie and nutrient levels in 
Sec. 210.10(c) or Sec. 210.10(i)(1), whichever is applicable.
    (ii) For school food authorities choosing the food-based menu 
planning alternative in Sec. 210.10(k), the State agency shall conduct 
nutrient analysis on the menu(s) served during the review period to 
determine if the nutrition standards set forth in Sec. 210.10(b) and 
Sec. 210.10(d) are met, except that, the State agency may:
    (A) Use the nutrient analysis of any school or school food authority 
that offers meals using the food-based menu planning alternative 
provided in Sec. 210.10(k) and/or Sec. 220.8(g) of this chapter and that 
conducts its own nutrient analysis under the criteria for nutrient 
analysis established in Sec. 210.10 and Sec. 220.8 for nutrient standard 
menu planning and assisted nutrient standard menu planning of those 
meals; or
    (B) Develop its own method for compliance review, subject to USDA 
approval.
    (iii) If the menu for the school week fails to comply with the 
nutrition standards specified in Sec. 210.10(b) and/or Sec. 220.8(a) and 
the appropriate nutrient levels in either Sec. 210.10(c), 
Sec. 210.10(d), or Sec. 210.10(i)(1) whichever is applicable, and/or 
Sec. 220.8(b), Sec. 220.8(c) or Sec. 220.8(e)(1) of this chapter, 
whichever is applicable, the school food authority shall develop, with 
the assistance and concurrence of the State agency, a corrective action 
plan designed to rectify those deficiencies. The State agency shall 
monitor the school food authority's execution of the plan to ensure that 
the terms of the corrective action plan are met.
    (iv) If a school food authority fails to meet the terms of the 
corrective action plan, the State agency shall determine if the school 
food authority is working in good faith towards compliance and, if so, 
may renegotiate the corrective action plan, if warranted. However, if 
the school food authority has not been acting in good faith to meet the 
terms of the corrective action plan and refuses to renegotiate the plan, 
the State agency shall determine if a disallowance of reimbursement 
funds as authorized under paragraph (c) of this section is warranted.
    (2) Assurance of compliance for finances. Each State agency shall 
ensure that school food authorities comply with the requirements to 
account for all revenues and expenditures of their nonprofit school food 
service. School food authorities shall meet the requirements for the 
allowability of nonprofit school food service expenditures in accordance 
with this part and, as applicable, 7 CFR part 3015. The State agency 
shall ensure compliance with the requirements to limit net cash 
resources and shall provide for approval of net cash resources in excess 
of three months' average expenditures. Each State agency shall monitor, 
through review or audit or by other means, the net cash resources of the 
nonprofit school food service in each school food authority 
participating in the Program. In the event that net cash resources 
exceed 3 months' average expenditures for the school food authority's 
nonprofit school food service or such other amount as may be approved in 
accordance with this paragraph, the State agency may require the school 
food authority to reduce the price children are charged for lunches, 
improve food quality or take other action designed to improve the 
nonprofit school food service. In the absence of any such action, the 
State agency shall make adjustments in the rate of reimbursement under 
the Program.
    (3) Improved management practices. The State agency shall work with 
the

[[Page 58]]

school food authority toward improving the school food authority's 
management practices where the State agency has found poor food service 
management practices leading to decreasing or low child participation 
and/or poor child acceptance of the Program or of foods served. If a 
substantial number of children who routinely and over a period of time 
do not favorably accept a particular item that is offered; return foods; 
or choose less than all food items/components or foods and menu items, 
as authorized under Sec. 210.10 or Sec. 210.10a, whichever is 
applicable, poor acceptance of certain menus may be indicated.
    (4) Program compliance. Each State agency shall require that school 
food authorities comply with the applicable provisions of this part. The 
State agency shall ensure compliance through audits, administrative 
reviews, technical assistance, training guidance materials or by other 
means.
    (5) Investigations. Each State agency shall promptly investigate 
complaints received or irregularities noted in connection with the 
operation of the Program, and shall take appropriate action to correct 
any irregularities. State agencies shall maintain on file, evidence of 
such investigations and actions. FCS and OIG may make reviews or 
investigations at the request of the State agency or where FCS or OIG 
determines reviews or investigations are appropriate.
    (6) Food service management companies. Each State agency shall 
annually review each contract between any school food authority and food 
service management company to ensure compliance with all the provisions 
and standards set forth in Sec. 210.16 of this part. Each State agency 
shall perform an on-site review of each school food authority 
contracting with a food service management company, at least once during 
each 5-year period. The State agency is encouraged to conduct such a 
review when performing reviews in accordance with Sec. 210.18 or 
Sec. 210.18a of the part. Such reviews shall include an assessment of 
the school food authority's compliance with Sec. 210.16 of this part. 
The State agency may require that all food service management companies 
that wish to contract for food service with any school food authority in 
the State register with the State agency. State agencies shall provide 
assistance upon request of a school food authority to assure compliance 
with Program requirements.
    (b) Commodity distribution information. The State agency shall 
periodically assess school needs for donated foods under 7 CFR part 250, 
notify the distributing agency of the schools' commodity needs, and 
recommend appropriate variations in rates of distribution. In assessing 
the commodity needs of schools, usage history and existing donated food 
inventories should be considered. As early as practicable each school 
year, but later than September 1, the State agency shall forward to the 
distributing agency and FCSRO an estimate of the average daily number of 
Program lunches to be served by school food authorities; an estimate of 
the average daily number of lunches to be served by commodity schools; 
and the amount of any cash payments in lieu of commodities for donated 
food processing and handling expenses to be received by or on behalf of 
commodity schools in accordance with Sec. 240.5 of this chapter. That 
State agency shall promptly revise the information required by this 
paragraph to reflect additions or deletions of eligible schools and 
provide any necessary adjustment in the number of lunches served.
    (c) Fiscal action. State agencies are responsible for ensuring 
Program integrity at the school food authority level. State agencies 
shall take fiscal action against school food authorities for Claims for 
Reimbursement that are not properly payable under this part including, 
if warranted, the disallowance of funds for failure to take corrective 
action in accordance with paragraph (a)(1) of this section. In taking 
fiscal action, State agencies shall use their own procedures within the 
constraints of this part and shall maintain all records pertaining to 
action taken under this section. The State agency may refer to FCS for 
assistance in making a claims determination under this part.
    (1) Definition. Fiscal action includes, but is not limited to, the 
recovery of

[[Page 59]]

overpayment through direct assessment or offset of future claims, 
disallowance of overclaims as reflected in unpaid Claims for 
Reimbursement, submission of a revised Claim for Reimbursement, and 
correction of records to ensure that unfiled Claims for Reimbursement 
are corrected when filed. Fiscal action also includes disallowance of 
funds for failure to take corrective action in accordance with paragraph 
(a)(1) of this section.
    (2) General principles. When taking fiscal action, State agencies 
shall consider the following:
    (i) The State agency shall identify the school food authority's 
correct entitlement and take fiscal action when any school food 
authority claims or receives more Federal funds than earned under 
Sec. 210.7 of this part. In order to take fiscal action, the State 
agency shall identify accurate counts of reimbursable lunches through 
available data, if possible. In the absence of reliable data, the State 
agency shall reconstruct the lunch accounts in accordance with 
procedures established by FCS. Such procedures will be based on the best 
available information including, participation factors for the review 
period, data from similar schools in the school food authority, etc.
    (ii) Unless otherwise specified under Sec. 210.18(m) of this part, 
fiscal action shall be extended back to the beginning of the school year 
or that point in time during the current school year when the infraction 
first occurred, as applicable. Based on the severity and longevity of 
the problem, the State agency may extend fiscal action back to previous 
school years, as applicable. The State agency shall ensure that any 
Claim for Reimbursement, filed subsequent to the reviews conducted under 
Sec. 210.18 or Sec. 210.18a of this part and prior to the implementation 
of corrective action, is limited to lunches eligible for reimbursement 
under this part.
    (iii) In taking fiscal action, State agencies shall assume that 
children determined by the reviewer to be incorrectly approved for free 
and reduced price lunches participated at the same rate as correctly 
approved children in the corresponding lunch category.
    (3) Failure to collect. If a State agency fails to disallow a claim 
or recover an overpayment from a school food authority, as described in 
this section, FCS will notify the State agency that a claim may be 
assessed against the State agency. In all such cases, the State agency 
shall have full opportunity to submit evidence concerning overpayment. 
If after considering all available information, FCS determines that a 
claim is warranted, FCS will assess a claim in the amount of such 
overpayment against the State agency. If the State agency fails to pay 
any such demand for funds promptly, FCS will reduce the State agency's 
Letter of Credit by the sum due in accordance with FCS' existing offset 
procedures for Letter of Credit. In such event, the State agency shall 
provide the funds necessary to maintain Program operations at the level 
of earnings from a source other than the Program.
    (4) Interest charge. If an agreement cannot be reached with the 
State agency for payment of its debts or for offset of debts on its 
current Letter of Credit, interest will be charged against the State 
agency from the date the demand leter was sent, at the rate established 
by the Secretary of Treasury.
    (5) Use of recovered payment. The amounts recovered by the State 
agency from school food authorities may be utilized during the fiscal 
year for which the funds were initially available, first, to make 
payments to school food authorities for the purposes of the Program; and 
second, to repay any State funds expended in the reimbursement of claims 
under the Program and not otherwise repaid. Any amounts recovered which 
are not so utilized shall be returned to FCS in accordance with the 
requirements of this part.
    (6) Exceptions. The State agency need not disallow payment or 
collect an overpayment arising out of the situations described in 
paragraphs (c)(6) (i) and (ii) of this section; provided that the school 
food authority corrects the problem(s) to the satisfaction of the State 
agency:
    (i) when any review or audit reveals that a school food authority is 
failing to meet the quantities for each food item required under the 
meal pattern in Sec. 210.10a or the food-based menu

[[Page 60]]

planning alternative in Sec. 210.10(k), whichever is applicable; or
    (ii) when any review or audit reveals that a school food authority 
is approving applications which indicate that the households' incomes 
are within the Income Eligibility Guidelines issued by the Department or 
the applications contain a food stamp or AFDC case number but the 
applications are missing the documentation specified under 7 CFR 245.2 
(a-4) (3) and/or (4); or
    (iii) when any review or audit reveals that a school food 
authority's failure to meet the nutrition standards of Sec. 210.10 is 
unintentional and the school food authority is meeting the requirements 
of a corrective plan developed and agreed to under paragraph (a)(1)(iii) 
of this section.
    (7) Claims adjustment. FCS will have the authority to determine the 
amount of, to settle, and to adjust any claim arising under the Program, 
and to compromise or deny such claim or any part thereof. FCS will also 
have the authority to waive such claims if FCS determines that to do so 
would serve the purposes of the Program. This provision shall not 
diminish the authority of the Attorney General of the United States 
under section 516 of title 28, U.S. Code, to conduct litigation on 
behalf of the United States.
    (d) Management evaluations. Each State agency shall provide FCS with 
full opportunity to conduct management evaluations of all State agency 
Program operations and shall provide OIG with full opportunity to 
conduct audits of all State agency Program operations. Each State agency 
shall make available its records, including records of the receipt and 
disbursement of funds under the Program and records of any claim 
compromised in accordance with this paragraph, upon a reasonable request 
by FCS, OIG, or the Comptroller General of the United States. FCS and 
OIG retain the right to visit schools and OIG also has the right to make 
audits of the records and operations of any school. In conducting 
management evaluations, reviews or audits for any fiscal year, the State 
agency, FCS, or OIG may disregard any overpayment if the total 
overpayment does not exceed $600 or, in the case of State agency claims 
in State administered Programs, it does not exceed the amount 
established under State law, regulations or procedure as a minimum 
amount for which claim will be made for State losses but not to exceed 
$600. However, no overpayment is to be disregarded where there is 
substantial evidence of violations of criminal law or civil fraud 
statutes.
    (e) Additional requirements. Nothing contained in this part shall 
prevent a State agency from imposing additional requirements for 
participation in the Program which are not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this part.

[53 FR 29147, Aug. 2, 1988, as amended at 54 FR 12582, Mar. 28, 1989; 56 
FR 32947, July 17, 1991; 57 FR 38586, Aug. 26, 1992; 59 FR 1894, Jan. 
13, 1994; 60 FR 31215, June 13, 1995; 60 FR 57147, Nov. 14, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 210.20  Reporting and recordkeeping.

    (a) Reporting summary. Participating State agencies shall submit 
forms and reports to FCS to demonstrate compliance with Program 
requirements. The reports include but are not limited to:
    (1) Requests for cash to make reimbursement payments to school food 
authorities as required under Sec. 210.5(a);
    (2) Information on the amounts of Federal Program funds expended and 
obligated to date (SF-269) as required under Sec. 210.5(d);
    (3) Statewide totals on Program participation (FCS-10) as required 
under Sec. 210.5(d);
    (4) Information on State funds provided by the State to meet the 
State matching requirements (FCS-13) specified under Sec. 210.17(g);
    (5) The names of school food authorities in need of a follow-up 
review;
    (6) Results of reviews and audits; and
    (7) Results of the commodity preference survey and recommendations 
for commodity purchases as required under Sec. 210.28(d).
    (b) Recordkeeping summary. Participating State agencies are required 
to maintain records to demonstrate compliance with Program requirements. 
The records include but are not limited to:
    (1) Accounting records and source documents to control the receipt, 
custody and disbursement of Federal Program funds as required under 
Sec. 210.5(a);

[[Page 61]]

    (2) Documentation supporting all school food authority claims paid 
by the State agency as required under Sec. 210.5(d);
    (3) Documentation to support the amount the State agency reported 
having used for State revenue matching as required under Sec. 210.17(h);
    (4) Records supporting the State agency's review of net cash 
resources as required under Sec. 210.19(a);
    (5) Reports on the results of investigations of complaints received 
or irregularities noted in connection with Program operations as 
required under Sec. 210.19(a)
    (6) Records of all reviews and audits, including records of action 
taken to correct Program violations; and records of fiscal action taken, 
including documentation of recoveries made;
    (7) State agency criteria for selecting schools for reviews and 
small school food authorities for follow-up reviews;
    (8) Documentation of action taken to disallow improper claims 
submitted by school food authorities, as required by Sec. 210.19(c) and 
as determined through claims processing, resulting from actions such as 
reviews, audits and USDA audits;
    (9) Records of USDA audit findings, State agency's and school food 
authorities' responses to them and of corrective action taken as 
required by Sec. 210.22(a);
    (10) Records pertaining to civil rights responsibilities as defined 
under Sec. 210.23(b); and
    (11) Records pertaining to the annual food preference survey of 
school food authorities as required by Sec. 210.28(d).

[53 FR 29147, Aug. 2, 1988, as amended at 56 FR 32948, July 17, 1991; 56 
FR 55527, Oct. 28, 1991]


<R04>
   Subpart E--State Agency and School Food Authority Responsibilities


<R05>
Sec. 210.21  Procurement.

    (a) General. State agencies and school food authorities shall comply 
with the requirements of 7 CFR part 3015 concerning the procurement of 
supplies, food, equipment and other services with Program funds. These 
requirements ensure that such materials and services are obtained for 
the Program efficiently and economically and in compliance with 
applicable laws and executive orders.
    (b) Contractual responsibilities. The standards contained in 7 CFR 
part 3015 do not relieve the State agency or school food authority of 
any contractual responsibilities under its contracts. The State agency 
or school food authority is the responsible authority, without recourse 
to FCS, regarding the settlement and satisfaction of all contractual and 
administrative issues arising out of procurements entered into in 
connection with the Program. This includes, but is not limited to source 
evaluation, protests, disputes, claims, or other matters of a 
contractual nature. Matters concerning violation of law are to be 
referred to the local, State, or Federal authority that has proper 
jurisdiction.
    (c) Procurement procedure. The State agency or school food authority 
may use its own procurement procedures which reflect applicable State 
and local laws and regulations, provided that procurements made with 
Program funds adhere to the standards set forth in 7 CFR part 3015.


<R05>
Sec. 210.22  Audits.

    (a) General. State agencies and school food authorities shall comply 
with the requirements of 7 CFR part 3015 concerning the audit 
requirements for recipients and subrecipients of the Department's 
financial assistance.
    (b) Audit procedure. These requirements call for organization-wide 
financial and compliance audits to ascertain whether financial 
operations are conducted properly; financial statements are presented 
fairly; recipients and subrecipients comply with the laws and 
regulations that affect the expenditures of Federal funds; recipients 
and subrecipients have established procedures to meet the objectives of 
federally assisted programs; and recipients and subrecipients are 
providing accurate and reliable information concerning grant funds. 
States and school food authorities shall use their own procedures to 
arrange for and prescribe the scope of independent audits, provided that 
such audits comply with the requirements set forth in 7 CFR part 3015.

[[Page 62]]


<R05>
Sec. 210.23  Other responsibilities.

    (a) Free and reduced price lunches and meal supplements. State 
agencies and school food authorities shall ensure that lunches and meal 
supplements are made available free or at a reduced price to all 
children who are determined by the school food authority to be eligible 
for such benefits. The determination of a child's eligibility for free 
or reduced price lunches and meal supplements is to be made in 
accordance with 7 CFR part 245.
    (b) Civil rights. In the operation of the Program, no child shall be 
denied benefits or be otherwise discriminated against because of race, 
color, national origin, age, sex, or handicap. State agencies and school 
food authorities shall comply with the requirements of: Title VI of the 
Civil Rights Act of 1964; title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972; 
section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973; the Age Discrimination 
Act of 1975; Department of Agriculture regulations on nondiscrimination 
(7 CFR parts 15, 15a, and 15b); and FCS Instruction 113-6.
    (c) Retention of records. State agencies and school food authorities 
may retain necessary records in their original form or on microfilm. 
State agency records shall be retained for a period of 3 years after the 
date of submission of the final Financial Status Report for the fiscal 
year. School food authority records shall be retained for a period of 3 
years after submission of the final Claim for Reimbursement for the 
fiscal year. In either case, if audit findings have not been resolved, 
the records shall be retained beyond the 3-year period as long as 
required for the resolution of the issues raised by the audit.

[53 FR 29147, Aug. 2, 1988, as amended at 58 FR 42489, Aug. 10, 1993]


<R04>
                    Subpart F--Additional Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 210.24  Withholding payments.

    In accordance with Sec. 3015.103 of this title, the State agency 
shall withhold Program payments, in whole or in part, to any school food 
authority which has failed to comply with the provisions of this part. 
Program payments shall be withheld until the school food authority takes 
corrective action satisfactory to the State agency, or gives evidence 
that such corrective action will be taken, or until the State agency 
terminates the grant in accordance with Sec. 210.25 of this part. 
Subsequent to the State agency's acceptance of the corrective actions, 
payments will be released for any lunches served in accordance with the 
provisions of this part during the period the payments were withheld.

[56 FR 32948, July 17, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 210.25  Suspension, termination and grant closeout procedures.

    Whenever it is determined that a State agency has materially failed 
to comply with the provisions of this part, or with FCS guidelines and 
instructions, FCS may suspend or terminate the Program in whole, or in 
part, or take any other action as may be available and appropriate. A 
State agency may also terminate the Program by mutual agreement with 
FCS. FCS and the State agency shall comply with the provisions of the 
Department's Uniform Federal Assistance Regulations, 7 CFR part 3015, 
subpart N concerning grant suspension, termination and closeout 
procedures. Furthermore, the State agency shall apply these provisions 
to suspension or termination of the Program in school food authorities.

[53 FR 29147, Aug. 2, 1988. Redesignated at 56 FR 32948, July 17, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 210.26  Penalties.

    Whoever embezzles, willfully misapplies, steals, or obtains by fraud 
any funds, assets, or property provided under this part whether received 
directly or indirectly from the Department, shall if such funds, assets, 
or property are of a value of $100 or more, be fined no more than 
$10,000 or imprisoned not more than 5 years or both; or if such funds, 
assets, or property are of a value of less than $100, be fined not more 
than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than 1 year or both. Whoever 
receives, conceals, or retains for personal use or gain, funds, assets, 
or property provided under this part, whether received directly or 
indirectly from the Department, knowing such funds, assets, or property 
have been embezzled,

[[Page 63]]

willfully misapplied, stolen, or obtained by fraud, shall be subject to 
the same penalties.

[53 FR 29147, Aug. 2, 1988. Redesignated at 56 FR 32948, July 17, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 210.27  Educational prohibitions.

    In carrying out the provisions of the Act, neither the Department 
nor the State agency shall impose any requirements with respect to 
teaching personnel, curriculum, instructions, methods of instruction, or 
materials of instruction in any school as a condition for participation 
in the Program.

[53 FR 29147, Aug. 2, 1988. Redesignated at 56 FR 32948, July 17, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 210.28  State Food Distribution Advisory Council.

    (a) Council composition. Each State educational agency, in 
cooperation with the State distributing agency, shall establish a State 
Food Distribution (SFD) Advisory Council which is composed of at least 
five representatives, excluding ex officio representatives, of schools 
which participate in the Program in the State. The State should make 
every effort to appoint individuals who represent large urban public 
schools; small rural public schools; residential child care 
institutions; private schools; parent teacher organizations; students 
from junior or senior high schools; nutritionists; school 
administrators; and teachers. These representatives shall be appointed 
for not more than 3 years.
    (b) Council leadership. The Chairman and Vice Chairman of the SFD 
Advisory Council shall be elected by members of the Council. The Chief 
State School Officer, or designee, shall be an ex officio member of the 
SFD Advisory Council acting in an advisory capacity and as a non-voting 
member. The Chief Officer of the State distributing agency which 
distributes USDA donated foods to schools within the State, or designee 
will be an ex officio member of the SFD Advisory Council, also acting in 
an advisory capacity and as a non-voting member. If the State 
educational agency and the State distributing agency are the same entity 
within the State, the ex officio member of the SFD Advisory Council 
shall be the Chief Food Distribution Officer of the State educational 
agency, or designee.
    (c) Council timeframe. The Council shall meet at least once a year 
and shall report to the State educational agency and State distributing 
agency, if it is a different entity, no later than March 30 of each 
year, recommendations concerning the manner of selection and 
distribution of commodity assistance for the next school year. The State 
educational agency shall inform FCSRO of the Council's recommendations 
no later than April 30 of each year.
    (d) Council responsibilities. Major responsibilites of the Council 
include providing the State educational and distributing agencies with 
information concerning the most desired foods and the least desired 
foods. This information shall be obtained in a survey of school food 
authorities within the State. The Council shall also advise the State 
educational and distributing agencies on the types and amounts of 
available donated food items to order, the preferred available package 
size, and donated foods school food authorities would like processed and 
desired end products. The Council may also advise the State educational 
and distributing agency on intra State distribution systems, delivery 
schedules, and State food distribution program operations. 
Recommendations for the Department regarding national purchasing 
practices, changes in donated food specifications and packaging 
improvements may also be included in the report.
    (e) State responsibilities. In reporting the Council's 
recommendations to FCSRO, the State educational agency shall include the 
number of school food authorities providing the required information to 
the Council; the average daily number of lunches served by schools in 
these school food authorities during April of the previous year; and the 
average daily number of lunches served by all school food authorities 
within the State during April of the previous year.
    (f) State recordkeeping. The State educational agency shall maintain 
records concerning the survey of school food authorities including, at a 
minimum, a description of survey methods and a

[[Page 64]]

copy of the format used to obtain food preferences; the name and address 
of each school food authority included in the survey; and a record of 
the data obtained from each school food authority.
    (g) Expenses. The State educational agency may make payment for 
justified expenses incurred for or by the SFD Advisory Council from 
State Administrative Expense funds. In instances when State 
Administrative Expense funds are used, payments shall be made in 
accordance with part 235 of this chapter. State agencies which are the 
same entity as the State distributing agency may also use food 
distribution assessment funds as provided for in Sec. 250.6 (i) and (j) 
of this chapter. Members of the SFD Advisory Council shall serve without 
compensation. The State educational agency shall provide compensation 
for necessary travel and subsistence expenses incurred by Council 
members in the performance of Council duties. Parent and student 
participant members, in addition to necessary travel and subsistence 
expenses, shall be compensated for personal expenses related to 
participation on the Council, such as child care expenses and lost wages 
during scheduled Council meetings. The State educational agency shall 
establish a system whereby expenses are paid in advance for any member 
who indicates that they cannot financially afford to meet any of the 
allowed expenses. In instances where members can meet these expenses, a 
reimbursement shall be provided in a timely manner.

[53 FR 29147, Aug. 2, 1988. Redesignated at 56 FR 32948, July 17, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 210.29  Pilot project exemptions.

    Those State agencies or school food authorities selected for the 
pilot projects mandated under section 18(d) of the Act may be exempted 
by the Department from some or all of the counting and free and reduced 
price application requirements of this part and 7 CFR part 245, as 
necessary, to conduct an approved pilot project. Additionally, those 
schools selected for pilot projects that also operate the School 
Breakfast Program (7 CFR part 220) and/or the Special Milk Program for 
Children (7 CFR part 215), may be exempted from the counting and free 
and reduced price application requirements mandated under these 
Programs. The Department shall notify the appropriate State agencies and 
school food authorities of its determination of which requirements are 
exempted after the Department's selection of pilot projects.

[55 FR 41504, Oct. 12, 1990. Redesignated at 56 FR 32948, July 17, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 210.30  Management evaluations.

    (a) Management evaluations. FCS will conduct a comprehensive 
management evaluation of each State agency's administration of the 
National School Lunch Program.
    (b) Basis for evaluations. FCS will evaluate all aspects of State 
agency management of the Program using tools such as State agency 
reviews as required under Sec. 210.18 or Sec. 210.18a of this part; 
reviews conducted by FCS in accordance with Sec. 210.18 of this part; 
FCS reviews of school food authorities and schools authorized under 
Sec. 210.19(a)(4) of this part; follow-up reviews and actions taken by 
the State agency to correct violations found during reviews; FCS 
observations of State agency reviews; and audit reports.
    (c) Scope of management evaluations. The management evaluation will 
determine whether the State agency has taken steps to ensure school food 
authority compliance with Program regulations, and whether the State 
agency is administering the Program in accordance with Program 
requirements and good management practices.
    (1) Local compliance. FCS will evaluate whether the State agency has 
actively taken steps to ensure that school food authorities comply with 
the provisions of this part.
    (2) State agency compliance. FCS will evaluate whether the State 
agency has fulfilled its State level responsibilities, including, but 
not limited to the following areas: use of Federal funds; reporting and 
recordkeeping; agreements with school food authorities; review of food 
service management company contracts; review of the claims payment 
process; implementation of the State agency's monitoring 
responsibilities; initiation and completion of corrective action; 
recovery of overpayments; disallowance of claims that are

[[Page 65]]

not properly payable; withholding of Program payments; oversight of 
school food authority procurement activities; training and guidance 
activities; civil rights; and compliance with the State Administrative 
Expense Funds requirements as specified in 7 CFR part 235.
    (d) School food authority reviews. FCS will examine State agency 
administration of the Program by reviewing local Program operations. 
When conducting these reviews under paragraph (d)(2) of this section, 
FCS will follow all the administrative review requirements specified in 
Sec. 210.18(a)-(h) of this part. When FCS conducts reviews, the findings 
will be sent to the State agency to ensure all the needed follow-up 
activity occurs. The State agency will, in all cases, be invited to 
accompany FCS reviewers.
    (1) Observation of State agency reviews. FCS may observe the State 
agency conduct of any review and/or any follow-up review as required 
under this part. At State agency request, FCS may assist in the conduct 
of the review.
    (2) Section 210.18 reviews. FCS will conduct administrative reviews 
or follow-up reviews in accordance with Sec. 210.18(a)-(h) of this part 
which will count toward meeting the State agency responsibilities 
identified under Sec. 210.18 of this part.
    (3) School food authority appeal of FCS findings. When 
administrative or follow-up review activity conducted by FCS in 
accordance with the provisions of paragraph (d)(2) of this section 
results in the denial of all or part of a Claim for Reimbursement or 
withholding of payment, a school food authority may appeal the FCS 
findings by filing a written request with the Chief, Administrative 
Review Branch, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Consumer 
Service, 3101 Park Center Drive, Alexandria, Virginia, 22302, in 
accordance with the appeal procedures specified in this paragraph:
    (i) The written request for a review of the record shall be 
postmarked within 15 calendar days of the date the appellant received 
the notice of the denial of all or a part of the Claim for Reimbursement 
or withholding payment and the envelope containing the request shall be 
prominently marked ``REQUEST FOR REVIEW''. FCS will acknowledge the 
receipt of the request for appeal within 10 calendar days. The 
acknowledgement will include the name and address of the FCS 
Administrative Review Officer (ARO) reviewing the case. FCS will also 
notify the State agency of the request for appeal.
    (ii) The appellant may refute the action specified in the notice in 
person and by written documentation to the ARO. In order to be 
considered, written documentation must be filed with the ARO not later 
than 30 calendar days after the appellant received the notice. The 
appellant may retain legal counsel, or may be represented by another 
person. A hearing shall be held by the ARO in addition to, or in lieu 
of, a review of written information submitted by the appellant only if 
the appellant so specifies in the letter of request for review. Failure 
of the appellant school food authority's representative to appear at a 
scheduled hearing shall constitute the appellant school food authority's 
waiver of the right to a personal appearance before the ARO, unless the 
ARO agrees to reschedule the hearing. A representative of FCS shall be 
allowed to attend the hearing to respond to the appellant's testimony 
and to answer questions posed by the ARO;
    (iii) If the appellant has requested a hearing, the appellant shall 
be provided with a least 10 calendar days advance written notice, sent 
by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the time, date, and 
place of the hearing;
    (iv) Any information on which FCS's action was based shall be 
available to the appellant for inspection from the date of receipt of 
the request for review;
    (v) The ARO shall be an independent and impartial official other 
than, and not accountable to, any person authorized to make decisions 
that are subject to appeal under the provisions of this section;
    (vi) The ARO shall make a determination based on information 
provided by FCS and the appellant, and on Program regulations;
    (vii) Within 60 calendar days of the receipt of the request for 
review, by written notice, sent by certified mail, return receipt 
requested, the ARO shall

[[Page 66]]

inform FCS, the State agency and the appellant of the determination of 
the ARO. The final determination shall take effect upon receipt of the 
written notice of the final decision by the school food authority;
    (viii) The action being appealed shall remain in effect during the 
appeal process;
    (ix) The determination by the ARO is the final administrative 
determination to be afforded to the appellant.
    (4) Coordination with State agency. FCS will coordinate school food 
authority selection with the State agency to ensure that no unintended 
overlap exists and to ensure reviews are conducted in a consistent 
manner.
    (e) Management evaluation findings. FCS will consider the results of 
all its review activity within each State, including school food 
authority reviews, in performing management evaluations and issuing 
management evaluation reports. FCS will communicate the findings of the 
management evaluation to appropriate State agency personnel in an exit 
conference. Subsequent to the exit conference, the State agency will be 
notified in writing of the management evaluation findings and any needed 
corrective actions or fiscal sanctions in accordance with the provisions 
Sec. 210.25 of this part and/or 7 CFR part 235.

[56 FR 32949, July 17, 1991, as amended at 57 FR 38586, Aug. 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 210.31  Regional office addresses.

    School food authorities desiring information concerning the Program 
should write to their State educational agency or to the appropriate 
Regional Office of FCS as indicated below:
    (a) In the States of Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New 
Hampshire, New York, Rhode Island, and Vermont: Northeast Regional 
Office, FCS, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 10 Causeway Street, Room 
501, Boston, Massachusetts 02222-1065.
    (b) In the States of Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, 
Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Tennessee: Southeast 
Regional Office, FCS, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 1100 Spring 
Street, NW., Atlanta, Georgia 30367.
    (c) In the States of Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Ohio, 
and Wisconsin: Midwest Regional Office, FCS, U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, 50 E. Washington Street, Chicago, Illinois 60602.
    (d) In the States of Arkansas, Louisiana, New Mexico, Oklahoma, and 
Texas: Southwest Regional Office, FCS, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
1100 Commerce Street, Room 5-C-30, Dallas, Texas 75242.
    (e) In the States of Alaska, American Samoa, Arizona, California, 
Guam, Hawaii, Idaho, Nevada, Oregon, the Commonwealth of the Northern 
Mariana Islands, and Washington: Western Regional Office, FCS, U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, 550 Kearny Street, Room 400, San Francisco, 
California 94108.
    (f) In the States of Delaware, District of Columbia, Maryland, New 
Jersey, Pennsylvania, Puerto Rico, Virginia, Virgin Islands, and West 
Virginia: Mid-Atlantic Regional Office, FCS, U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Mercer Corporate Park, Corporate Boulevard, CN 02150, 
Trenton, New Jersey 08650.
    (g) In the States of Colorado, Iowa, Kansas, Missouri, Montana, 
Nebraska, North Dakota, South Dakota, Utah, and Wyoming: Mountain Plains 
Regional Office, FCS, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 1244 Speer 
Boulevard, Suite 903, Denver, Colorado 80204.

[53 FR 29147, Aug. 2, 1988. Redesignated at 55 FR 41503, Oct. 12, 1990. 
Further redesignated at 56 FR 32948, July 17, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 210.32  OMB control numbers.

    The following control numbers have been assigned to the information 
collection requirements in 7 CFR part 210 by the Office of Management 
and Budget pursuant to the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980, Pub. L. 96-
511.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                           Current OMB  
     7 CFR section where requirements are described        control No.  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
210.3(b)...............................................        0584-0327
210.5(d)...............................................        0584-0006
210.5(d)(1)............................................        0584-0002
210.5(d)(2)............................................        0584-0341
210.5(d)(3)............................................        0584-0341
210.6(b)...............................................        0584-0006
210.8..................................................        0584-0006
                                                               0584-0284
210.9..................................................        0584-0006
                                                               0584-0026
                                                               0584-0329
210.10(b)..............................................        0584-0006
210.10(i)(1)...........................................        0584-0006

[[Page 67]]

                                                                        
210.14(c)..............................................        0584-0006
210.16.................................................        0584-0006
210.17.................................................        0584-0006
210.17(g)..............................................        0584-0075
210.18.................................................        0584-0006
210.19.................................................        0584-0006
210.22.................................................        0584-0006
210.23(c)..............................................        0584-0006
210.24.................................................        0584-0006
210.27.................................................        0584-0006
------------------------------------------------------------------------

[53 FR 29147, Aug. 2, 1990. Redesignated at 55 FR 41503, Oct. 12, 1990. 
Further redesignated at 56 FR 32948, July 17, 1991]

            Appendix A to Part 210--Alternate Foods for Meals

            Enriched Macaroni Products With Fortified Protein

    1. Schools may utilize the enriched macaroni products with fortified 
protein defined in paragraph 3 as a food item in meeting the meal 
requirements of this part under the following terms and conditions:
    (a) One ounce (28.35 grams) of a dry enriched macaroni product with 
fortified protein may be used to meet not more than one-half of the meat 
or meat alternate requirements specified in Sec. 210.10 or Sec. 210.10a, 
whichever is applicable, when served in combination with 1 or more 
ounces (28.35 grams) of cooked meat, poultry, fish, or cheese. The size 
of servings of the cooked combination may be adjusted for various age 
groups.
    (b) Only enriched macaroni products with fortified protein that bear 
a label containing substantially the following legend shall be so 
utilized: ``One ounce (28.35 grams) dry weight of this product meets 
one-half of the meat or meat alternate requirements of lunch or supper 
of the USDA child nutrition programs when served in combination with 1 
or more ounces (28.35 grams) of cooked meat, poultry, fish, or cheese. 
In those States where State or local law prohibits the wording 
specified, a legend acceptable to both the State or local authorities 
and FCS shall be substituted.''
    (c) Enriched macaroni product may not be used for infants under 1 
year of age.
    2. Only enriched macaroni products with fortified protein that have 
been accepted by FCS for use in the USDA Child Nutrition Programs may be 
labeled as provided in paragraph 1(b) of this appendix. Manufacturers 
seeking acceptance of their product shall furnish FCS a chemical 
analysis, the Protein Digestibility-Corrected Amino Acid Score (PDCAAS), 
and such other pertinent data as may be requested by FCS, except that 
prior to November 7, 1994, manufacturers may submit protein efficiency 
ratio analysis in lieu of the PDCAAS. This information is to be 
forwarded to: Director, Nutrition and Technical Services Division, Food 
and Consumer Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 3101 Park Center 
Drive, room 607, Alexandria, VA 22302. All laboratory analyses are to be 
performed by independent or other laboratories acceptable to FCS. (FCS 
prefers an independent laboratory.) All laboratories shall retain the 
``raw'' laboratory data for a period of 1 year. Such information shall 
be made available to FCS upon request. Manufacturers must notify FCS if 
there is a change in the protein portion of their product after the 
original testing. Manufacturers who report such a change in protein in a 
previously approved product must submit protein data in accordance with 
the method specified in this paragraph.
    3. The product should not be designed in such a manner that would 
require it to be classified as a Dietary Supplement as described by the 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 21 CFR part 105. To be accepted by 
FCS, enriched macaroni products with fortified protein must conform to 
the following requirements:
    (a)(1) Each of these foods is produced by drying formed units of 
dough made with one or more of the milled wheat ingredients designated 
in 21 CFR 139.110(a) and 139.138(a), and other ingredients to enable the 
finished food to meet the protein requirements set out in paragraph 
3.(a)(2)(i) under Enriched Macaroni Products with Fortified Protein in 
this appendix. Edible protein sources, including food grade flours or 
meals made from nonwheat cereals or from oilseeds, may be used. Vitamin 
and mineral enrichment nutrients are added to bring the food into 
conformity with the requirements of paragraph (b) under Enriched 
Macaroni Products with Fortified Protein in this appendix. Safe and 
suitable ingredients, as provided for in paragraph (c) under Enriched 
Macaroni Products with Fortified Protein in this appendix, may be added. 
The proportion of the milled wheat ingredient is larger than the 
proportion of any other ingredient used.
    (2) Each such finished food, when tested by the methods described in 
the pertinent sections of ``Official Methods of Analysis of the AOAC 
International,'' (formerly the Association of Official Analytical 
Chemists), 15th Ed. (1990) meets the following specifications. This 
publication is incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 
552(a) and 1 CFR part 51. Copies may be obtained from the AOAC 
International, 2200 Wilson Blvd., suite 400, Arlington, VA 22201-3301. 
This publication may be examined at the Food and Consumer Service, 
Nutrition and Technical Services Division, 3101 Park Center Drive, room 
607, Alexandria, Virginia 22302 or the Office of the Federal Register, 
800 North Capital Street, NW., suite 700, Washington, DC.
    (i) The protein content (N x 6.25) is not less than 20 percent by 
weight (on a 13 percent

[[Page 68]]

moisture basis) as determined by the appropriate method of analysis in 
the AOAC manual cited in (a)(2) under Enriched Macaroni Products with 
Fortified Protein in this appendix. The protein quality is not less than 
95 percent that of casein as determined on a dry basis by the PDCAAS 
method as described below:
    (A) The PDCAAS shall be determined by the methods given in sections 
5.4.1, 7.2.1. and 8.0 as described in ``Protein Quality Evaluation, 
Report of the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation on Protein Quality 
Evaluation,'' Rome, 1990, as published by the Food and Agriculture 
Organization (FAO) of the United Nations/World Health Organization 
(WHO). This report is incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 
U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51. Copies of this report may be obtained 
from the Nutrition and Technical Services Division, Food and Consumer 
Service, 3101 Park Center Drive, room 607, Alexandria, Virginia 22302. 
This report may also be inspected at the Office of the Federal Register 
800 North Capitol St., NW., suite 700, Washington, DC.
    (B) The standard used for assessing protein quality in the PDCAAS 
method is the amino acid scoring pattern established by FAO/WHO and 
United Nations University (UNU) in 1985 for preschool children 2 to 5 
years of age which has been adopted by the National Academy of Sciences, 
Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDA), 1989.
    (C) To calculate the PDCAAS for an individual food, the test food 
must be analyzed for proximate analysis and amino acid composition 
according to AOAC methods.
    (D) The PDCAAS may be calculated using FDA's limited data base of 
published true digestibility values (determined using humans and rats). 
The true digestibility values contained in the WHO/FAO report referenced 
in paragraph 3.(a)(2)(i)(A) under Enriched Macaroni Products with 
Fortified Protein in this appendix may also be used. If the 
digestibility of the protein is not available from these sources it must 
be determined by a laboratory according to methods in the FAO/WHO report 
(sections 7.2.1 and 8.0).
    (E) The most limiting essential amino acid (that is, the amino acid 
that is present at the lowest level in the test food compared to the 
standard) is identified in the test food by comparing the levels of 
individual amino acids in the test food with the 1985 FAO/WHO/UNU 
pattern of essential amino acids established as a standard for children 
2 to 5 years of age.
    (F) The value of the most limiting amino acid (the ratio of the 
amino acid in the test food over the amino acid value from the pattern) 
is multiplied by the percent of digestibility of the protein. The 
resulting number is the PDCAAS.
    (G) The PDCAAS of food mixtures must be calculated from data for the 
amino acid composition and digestibility of the individual components by 
means of a weighted average procedure. An example for calculating a 
PDCAAS for a food mixture of varying protein sources is shown in section 
8.0 of the FAO/WHO report cited in paragraph 3.(a)(2)(i)(A) under 
Enriched Macaroni Products with Fortified Protein in this appendix.
    (H) For the purpose of this regulation, each 100 grams of the 
product (on a 13 percent moisture basis) must contain protein in amounts 
which is equivalent to that provided by 20 grams of protein with a 
quality of not less than 95 percent casein. The equivalent grams of 
protein required per 100 grams of product (on a 13 percent moisture 
basis) would be determined by the following equation:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR07OC94.022

    X=grams of protein required per 100 grams of product
    a=20 grams (amount of protein if casein)
    b=.95 [95%  x  1 (PDCAAS of casein)
    c=PDCAAS for protein used in formulation
    (ii) The total solids content is not less than 87 percent by weight 
as determined by the methods described in the ``Official Methods of 
Analysis of the AOAC International'' cited in paragraph (a)(2) under 
Enriched Macaroni Products with Fortified Protein in this appendix.
    (b)(1) Each pound of food covered by this section shall contain 5 
milligrams of thiamine, 2.2 milligrams of riboflavin, 34 milligrams of 
niacin or niacinamide, and 16.5 milligrams of iron.
    (2) Each pound of such food may also contain 625 milligrams of 
calcium.
    (3) Only harmless and assimilable forms of iron and calcium may be 
added. The enrichment nutrients may be added in a harmless carrier used 
only in a quantity necessary to effect a uniform distribution of the 
nutrients in the finished food. Reasonable overages, within the limits 
of good manufacturing practice, may be used to assure that the 
prescribed levels of the vitamins and mineral(s) in paragraphs (b)(1) 
and (2) under Enriched Macaroni Products with Fortified Protein in this 
appendix are maintained throughout the expected shelf life of the food 
under customary conditions of distribution.
    (c) Ingredients that serve a useful purpose such as to fortify the 
protein or facilitate production of the food are the safe and suitable 
ingredients referred to in paragraph (a) under Enriched Macaroni 
Products with Fortified Protein in this appendix. This does not include 
color additives, artificial flavorings, artificial sweeteners, chemical 
preservatives, or starches. Ingredients deemed suitable for use by this 
paragraph are added in amounts that are not in excess of those 
reasonably required to achieve their intended purposes.

[[Page 69]]

Ingredients are deemed to be safe if they are not food additives within 
the meaning of section 201(s) of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic 
Act, or in case they are food additives if they are used in conformity 
with regulations established pursuant to section 409 of the act.
    (d)(1) The name of any food covered by this section is ``Enriched 
Wheat ________________ Macaroni Product with Fortified Protein'', the 
blank being filled in with appropriate word(s) such as ``Soy'' to show 
the source of any flours or meals used that were made from non-wheat 
cereals or from oilseeds. In lieu of the words ``Macaroni Product'' the 
words ``Macaroni'', ``Spaghetti'', or ``Vermicelli'' as appropriate, may 
be used if the units conform in shape and size to the requirements of 21 
CFR 139.110 (b), (c), or (d).
    (2) When any ingredient not designated in the part of the name 
prescribed in paragraph (d)(1) under Enriched Macaroni Products with 
Fortified Protein in this appendix, is added in such proportion as to 
contribute 10 percent or more of the quantity of protein contained in 
the finished food, the name shall include the statement ``Made with 
________________'', the blank being filled in with the name of each such 
ingredient, e.g. ``Made with nonfat milk''.
    (3) When, in conformity with paragraph (d)(1) or (d)(2) under 
Enriched Macaroni Products with Fortified Protein in this appendix, two 
or more ingredients are listed in the name, their designations shall be 
arranged in descending order of predominance by weight.
    (4) If a food is made to comply with a section of 21 CFR part 139, 
but also meets the compositional requirements of the Enriched Macaroni 
with Fortified Protein Appendix, it may alternatively bear the name set 
out in the other section.
    (e) Each ingredient used shall declare its common name as required 
by the applicable section of 21 CFR part 101. In addition, the 
ingredients statement shall appear in letters not less than one half the 
size of that required by 21 CFR 101.105 for the declaration of net 
quantity of contents, and in no case less than one-sixteenth of an inch 
in height.

                       Vegetable Protein Products

    1. Schools, institutions, and service institutions may use a 
vegetable product, defined in paragraph 2, as a food component meeting 
the meal requirements specified in Sec. 210.10 or Sec. 210.10a, 
whichever is applicable, Sec. 225.20 or Sec. 226.20 under the following 
terms and conditions:
    (a) The vegetable protein product must be prepared in combination 
with raw or cooked meat, poultry or seafood and shall resemble as well 
as substitute, in part, for one of these major protein foods. Substitute 
refers to a vegetable protein product whose presence in another food 
results in the presence of a smaller amount of meat, poultry or seafood 
than is customarily expected or than appears to be present in that food. 
Examples of items in which a vegetable protein product may be used 
include, but are not limited to, beef patties, beef crumbles, pizza 
topping, meat loaf, meat sauce, taco filling, burritos, and tuna salad.
    (b) Vegetable protein products may be used in the dry form 
(nonhydrated), partially hydrated or fully hydrated form in combination 
with meat, poultry or seafood. The moisture content of the fully 
hydrated vegetable protein product shall be such that the mixture will 
have a minimum of 18 percent protein by weight or equivalent amount for 
the dry or partially hydrated form (based on the level that would be 
provided if the product were fully hydrated).
    (c) The quantity, by weight, of the fully hydrated vegetable protein 
product must not exceed 30 parts to 70 parts meat, poultry or seafood on 
an uncooked basis. The quantity by weight of the dry or partially 
hydrated vegetable protein product must not exceed a level equivalent to 
the amount (dry weight) used in the fully hydrated product at the 30 
percent level of substitution. The dry or partially hydrated product's 
replacement of meat, poultry or seafood will be based on the level of 
substitution it would provide if it were fully hydrated.
    (d) A vegetable protein product may be used to satisfy the meat/meat 
alternate requirement when combined with meat, poultry or seafood and 
when it meets the other requirements of this section. The combination of 
the vegetable protein product and meat, poultry or seafood may meet all 
or part of the meat/meat alternate requirement specified in Sec. 210.10 
or Sec. 210.10a, whichever is applicable, Sec. 225.20 or Sec. 226.20.
    (e) The contribution vegetable protein products make toward the 
meat/meat alternate requirement specified in Sec. 210.10 or 
Sec. 210.10a, whichever is applicable, Sec. 225.20, or Sec. 226.20 shall 
be determined on the basis of the preparation yield of the meat, poultry 
or seafood with which it is combined. When computing the preparation 
yield of a product containing meat, poultry or seafood and vegetable 
protein product, the vegetable protein product shall be evaluated as 
having the same preparation yield that is applied to the meat, poultry 
or seafood it replaces.
    (f) When vegetable protein products are served in a meal with other 
alternate foods authorized in appendix A, each individual alternate food 
shall be used as specifically directed.
    2. A vegetable protein product to be used to resemble and 
substitute, in part, for meat, poultry or seafood, as specified in 
paragraph 1 must meet the following criteria:
    (a) The vegetable protein product (substitute food) shall contain 
one or more vegetable protein products which are defined as

[[Page 70]]

foods which are processed so that some portion of the nonprotein 
constituents of the vegetable is removed. These vegetable protein 
products are safe and suitable edible products produced from vegetable 
(plant) sources including, but not limited to soybeans, peanuts, wheat, 
and corn.
    (b) The types of vegetable protein products described in paragraph 
2(a)(1) above shall include flour, concentrate, and isolate as defined 
below:
    (1) When a product contains less than 65 percent protein by weight 
calculated on a moisture-free basis excluding added flavors, colors, or 
other added substances it is a ``______flour,'' the blank is to be 
filled with the name of the source of the protein, e.g., ``soy'' or 
``peanuts.''
    (2) When a product contains 65 percent or more but less than 90 
percent protein by weight calculated on a moisture-free basis excluding 
added flavors,colors, or other added substances, it is a ``______ 
protein concentrate,'' the blank to be filled with the name of the 
source of the protein, e.g., ``soy'' or ``peanut.''
    (3) When a product contains 90 percent or more protein by weight 
calculated on a moisture-free basis excluding added flavors, colors, or 
other added substances, it is a ``protein isolate'' or ``isolated ______ 
protein,'' the blank to be filled in with the name of the source of the 
protein, e.g., ``soy'' or ``peanut.''
    (c) Compliance with the moisture and protein provisions of paragraph 
2(b) (1), (2), and (3) above shall be determined by the appropriate 
methods described in ``Official Methods of Analysis of the Association 
of Official Analytical Chemists'' (latest edition).
    (d) Vegetable protein products which are used to resemble and 
substitute, in part, for meat, poultry or seafood shall be labeled in 
conformance with applicable paragraphs of 102.76, tentative final 
regulations published by the Food and Drug Administration in the Federal 
Register of July 14, 1978 (43 FR 30472). Adopted for the purpose of this 
regulation are the following:
    (1) The common or usual names for a vegetable protein product used 
to resemble and substitute, in part, for meat, poultry or seafood shall 
include the term ``vegetable protein product'' and may include the term 
``textured'' or ``texturized'' and/or a term e.g., ``granules,'' when 
such term is appropriate. The term ``plant'' may be used in the name in 
lieu of the term ``vegetable.''
    (2) The vegetable protein products used as ingredients in the 
substitute food shall be listed by source (e.g., soy or peanut) and 
product type (i.e., flour, concentrate, isolate) in the ingredient 
statement of the label. Product type(s) listed shall comply with the 
appropriate definition(s) set forth in paragraph 2(b) (1), (2) and (3), 
and may include a term which accurately describes the physical form of 
the product, e.g., ``granules'' when such term is appropriate.
    (e) Vegetable protein products which are used to resemble and 
substitute, in part, for meat, poultry or seafood shall meet the 
following nutritional specifications adopted from 
Sec. 102.76(f)(1)(ii)(a)(b) tentative final regulations, published by 
the Food and Drug Administration in the Federal Register of July 14, 
1978 (43 FR 30472).
    (1) The biological quality of the protein in the vegetable protein 
product shall be at least 80 percent that of casein, determined by 
performing PER assay or unless FCS grants an exception by approving an 
alternate test.
    (2) The vegetable protein product shall contain at least 18 percent 
protein by weight when hydrated or formulated to be used in combination 
with meat, poultry or seafood. (``When hydrated or formulated'' refers 
to a dry vegetable protein product and the amount of water, fat, oil, 
colors, flavors or any other substances which have been added in order 
to make the resultant mixture resemble the meat, poultry or seafood).
    (3) The vegetable protein product must contain the following levels 
of nutrients per gram of protein:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                            Nutrient                              Amount
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Vitamin A (IU).................................................    13.  
Thiamine (milligrams)..........................................     0.02
Riboflavin (milligrams)........................................      .01
Niacin (milligrams)............................................      .3 
Pantothenic acid (milligrams)..................................      .04
Vitamin B<INF>6 (milligrams)........................................      .02
Vitamin B<INF>12 (micrograms).......................................      .1 
Iron (milligrams)..............................................      .15
Magnesium (milligrams).........................................     1.15
Zinc (milligrams)..............................................      .5 
Copper (micrograms)............................................    24.  
Potassium (milligrams).........................................    17.  
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (4) Compliance with the nutrient provisions set forth in paragraph 
2(e) (1), (2) and (3) above shall be determined by the appropriate 
methods described in ``Official Methods of Analysis of the Association 
of Official Analytical Chemists'' (latest edition).
    (f) Vegetable protein products to be used in the Child Nutrition 
Programs to resemble and substitute, in part, for meat, poultry or 
seafood that comply with the labeling and nutrition specifications set 
forth in paragraph 2(d) (1) and (2) and paragraph 2(e) (1), (2) and (3) 
shall bear a label containing the following statement: ``This product 
meets USDA-FCS requirements for use in meeting a portion of the meat/
meat alternate requirement of Child Nutrition Programs''. This statement 
shall appear on the principal display panel area of the package.
    (g) It is recommended that for vegetable protein products to be used 
to resemble and substitute, in part, for meat, poultry or seafood and 
labeled as specified in paragraph

[[Page 71]]

2(f) above, manufacturers provide information on the percent protein 
contained in the dry vegetable protein product (on an as is basis).
    (h) It is recommended that for a vegetable protein product mix, 
manufacturers provide information on (1) the amount by weight of dry 
vegetable protein product in the package, (2) hydration instructions, 
and (3) instructions on how to combine the mix with meat, poultry or 
seafood. A vegetable protein product mix is defined as a dry product 
containing vegetable protein products that comply with the labeling and 
nutritional specifications set forth in paragraphs 2(d) (1) and (2) and 
paragraphs 2(e) (1), (2), and (3) along with substantial levels (more 
than 5 percent) of seasonings, bread crumbs, flavorings, etc.
    3. Schools, institutions, and service institutions may use a 
commercially prepared meat, poultry or seafood product combined with 
vegetable protein products to meet all or part of the meat/meat 
alternate requirement specified in Sec. 210.10 or Sec. 210.10a, 
whichever is applicable, Sec. 225.10 or Sec. 226.21 if the product bears 
a label containing the statement: ``This item contains vegetable protein 
product(s) which is authorized as an alternate food in the Child 
Nutrition Programs.'' (Outlined in paragraph 2 above). This would 
designate that the vegetable protein product used in the formulation of 
the meat, poultry or seafood item complies with the naming and 
nutritional specifications set forth in paragraph 2 above. The presence 
of this label does not insure the proper level of hydration, ratio of 
substitution nor the contribution that the product makes toward meal 
pattern requirements for the Child Nutrition Programs.

[51 FR 34874, Sept. 30, 1986; 51 FR 41295, Nov. 14, 1986, as amended at 
53 FR 29164, Aug. 2, 1988; 59 FR 51086, Oct. 7, 1994; 60 FR 31216; June 
13, 1995; 61 FR 37671, July 19, 1996]

Appendix B to Part 210--Categories of Foods of Minimal Nutritional Value

    (a) Foods of minimal nutritional value--Foods of minimal nutritional 
value are:
    (1) Soda Water--A class of beverages made by absorbing carbon 
dioxide in potable water. The amount of carbon dioxide used is not less 
than that which will be absorbed by the beverage at a pressure of one 
atmosphere and at a temperature of 60 deg. F. It either contains no 
alcohol or only such alcohol, not in excess of 0.5 percent by weight of 
the finished beverage, as is contributed by the flavoring ingredient 
used. No product shall be excluded from this definition because it 
contains artificial sweeteners or discrete nutrients added to the food 
such as vitamins, minerals and protein.
    (2) Water Ices--As defined by 21 CFR 135.160 Food and Drug 
Administration Regulations except that water ices which contain fruit or 
fruit juices are not included in this definition.
    (3) Chewing Gum--Flavored products from natural or synthetic gums 
and other ingredients which form an insoluble mass for chewing.
    (4) Certain Candies--Processed foods made predominantly from 
sweeteners or artifical sweeteners with a variety of minor ingredients 
which characterize the following types:
    (i) Hard Candy--A product made predominantly from sugar (sucrose) 
and corn syrup which may be flavored and colored, is characterized by a 
hard, brittle texture, and includes such items as sour balls, fruit 
balls, candy sticks, lollipops, starlight mints, after dinner mints, 
sugar wafers, rock candy, cinnamon candies, breath mints, jaw breakers 
and cough drops.
    (ii) Jellies and Gums--A mixture of carbohydrates which are combined 
to form a stable gelatinous system of jelly-like character, and are 
generally flavored and colored, and include gum drops, jelly beans, 
jellied and fruit-flavored slices.
    (iii) Marshmallow Candies--An aerated confection composed as sugar, 
corn syrup, invert sugar, 20 percent water and gelatin or egg white to 
which flavors and colors may be added.
    (iv) Fondant--A product consisting of microscopic-sized sugar 
crystals which are separated by thin film of sugar and/or invert sugar 
in solution such as candy corn, soft mints.
    (v) Licorice--A product made predominantly from sugar and corn syrup 
which is flavored with an extract made from the licorice root.
    (vi) Spun Candy--A product that is made from sugar that has been 
boiled at high temperature and spun at a high speed in a special 
machine.
    (vii) Candy Coated Popcorn--Popcorn which is coated with a mixture 
made predominantly from sugar and corn syrup.
    (b) Petitioning Procedures--Reconsideration of the list of foods of 
minimal nutritional value identified in paragraph (a) of this section 
may be pursued as follows:
    (1) Any person may submit a petition to FCS requesting that an 
individual food be exempted from a category of foods of minimal 
nutritional value listed in paragraph (a). In the case of artificially 
sweetened foods, the petition must include a statement of the percent of 
Reference Daily Intake (RDI) for the eight nutrients listed in 
Sec. 210.11(a)(2) ``Foods of minimal nutritional value,'' that the food 
provides per serving and the petitioner's source of this information. In 
the case of all other foods, the petition must include a statement of 
the percent of RDI for the eight nutrients listed in Sec. 210.11(a)(2)

[[Page 72]]

``Foods of minimal nutritional value,'' that the food provides per 
serving and per 100 calories and the petitioner's source of this 
information. The Department will determine whether or not the individual 
food is a food of minimal nutritional value as defined in 
Sec. 210.11(a)(2) and will inform the petitioner in writing of such 
determination, and the public by notice in the Federal Register as 
indicated below under paragraph (b)(3) of this section. In determining 
whether an individual food is a food of minimal nutritional value, 
discrete nutrients added to the food will not be taken into account.
    (2) Any person may submit a petition to FCS requesting that foods in 
a particular category of foods be classified as foods of minimal 
nutritional value as defined in Sec. 210.11(a)(2). The petition must 
identify and define the food category in easily understood language, 
list examples of the food contained in the category and include a list 
of ingredients which the foods in that category usually contain. If, 
upon review of the petition, the Department determines that the foods in 
that category should not be classified as foods of minimal nutritional 
value, the petitioners will be so notified in writing. If, upon review 
of the petition, the Department determines that there is a substantial 
likelihood that the foods in that category should be classified as foods 
of minimal nutritional value as defined in Sec. 210.11(a)(2), the 
Department shall at that time inform the petitioner. In addition, the 
Department shall publish a proposed rule restricting the sale of foods 
in that category, setting forth the reasons for this action, and 
soliciting public comments. On the basis of comments received within 60 
days of publication of the proposed rule and other available 
information, the Department will determine whether the nutrient 
composition of the foods indicates that the category should be 
classified as a category of foods of minimal nutritional value. The 
petitioner shall be notified in writing and the public shall be notified 
of the Department's final determination upon publication in the Federal 
Register as indicated under paragraph (b)(3) of this section.
    (3) By May 1 and November 1 of each year, the Department will amend 
appendix B to exclude those individual foods identified under paragraph 
(b)(1) of this section, and to include those categories of foods 
identified under paragraph (b)(2) of this section, provided, that there 
are necessary changes. The schedule for amending appendix B is as 
follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                Publication             
     Actions for publication     ---------------------------------------
                                          May              November     
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Deadline for receipt of           Nov. 15...........  May 15.           
 petitions by USDA.                                                     
USDA to notify petitioners of     Feb. 1............  Aug. 1.           
 results of Departmental review                                         
 and publish proposed rule (if                                          
 applicable).                                                           
60 Day comment period...........  Feb. 1 through      Aug. 1 through    
                                   Apr. 1.             Oct. 1.          
Public notice of amendment of     May 1.............  Nov. 1.           
 appendix B by.                                                         
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (4) Written petitions should be sent to the Chief, Technical 
Assistance Branch, Nutrition and Technical Services Division, FCS, USDA, 
Alexandria, Virginia 22302, on or before November 15 or May 15 of each 
year. Petitions must include all information specified in paragraph (b) 
of this appendix and Sec. 220.12(b) (1) or (2) as appropriate.

[53 FR 29147, Aug. 2, 1988, as amended at 54 FR 18465, May 1, 1989; 59 
FR 23614, May 6, 1994]

        Appendix C to Part 210--Child Nutrition Labeling Program

    1. The Child Nutrition (CN) Labeling Program is a voluntary 
technical assistance program administered by the Food and Consumer 
Service in conjunction with the Food Safety and Inspection Service 
(FSIS), and Agricultural Marketing Service (AMS) of the U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, and National Marine Fisheries Service of the U.S. 
Department of Commerce (USDC) for the Child Nutrition Programs. This 
program essentially involves the review of a manufacturer's recipe or 
product formulation to determine the contribution a serving of a 
commercially prepared product makes toward meal pattern requirements and 
a review of the CN label statement to ensure its accuracy. CN labeled 
products must be produced in accordance with all requirements set forth 
in this rule.
    2. Products eligible for CN labels are as follows:
    (a) Commercially prepared food products that contribute 
significantly to the meat/meat alternate component of meal pattern 
requirements of 7 CFR 210.10 or 210.10a, whichever is applicable, 
225.20, and 226.20 and are served in the main dish.
    (b) Juice drinks and juice drink products that contain a minimum of 
50 percent full-strength juice by volume.
    3. For the purpose of this appendix the following definitions apply:
    (a) ``CN label'' is a food product label that contains a CN label 
statement and CN logo as defined in paragraph 3 (b) and (c) below.
    (b) The ``CN logo'' (as shown below) is a distinct border which is 
used around the edges of a ``CN label statement'' as defined in 
paragraph 3(c).

[[Page 73]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC17SE91.000


    (c) The ``CN label statement'' includes the following:
    (1) The product identification number (assigned by FCS),
    (2) The statement of the product's contribution toward meal pattern 
requirements of 7 CFR 210.10 or 210.10a, whichever is applicable, 
Sec. 220.8 or Sec. 220.8a, whichever is applicable, Secs. 225.20, and 
226.20. The statement shall identify the contribution of a specific 
portion of a meat/meat alternate product toward the meat/meat alternate, 
bread/bread alternate, and/or vegetable/fruit component of the meal 
pattern requirements. For juice drinks and juice drink products the 
statement shall identify their contribution toward the vegetable/fruit 
component of the meal pattern requirements,
    (3) Statement specifying that the use of the CN logo and CN 
statement was authorized by FCS, and
    (4) The approval date.
    For example:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC17SE91.001
    
    (d) Federal inspection means inspection of food products by FSIS, 
AMS or USDC.
    4. Food processors or manufacturers may use the CN label statement 
and CN logo as defined in paragraph 3 (b) and (c) under the following 
terms and conditions:
    (a) The CN label must be reviewed and approved at the national level 
by FCS and appropriate USDA or USDC Federal agency responsible for the 
inspection of the product.
    (b) The CN labeled product must be produced under Federal inspection 
by USDA or USDC. The Federal inspection must be performed in accordance 
with an approved partial or total quality control program or standards 
established by the appropriate Federal inspection service.
    (c) The CN label statement must be printed as an integral part of 
the product label along with the product name, ingredient listing, the 
inspection shield or mark for the appropriate inspection program, the 
establishment number where appropriate, and the manufacturer's or 
distributor's name and address. The inspection marking for CN labeled 
non-meat, non-poultry, and non-seafood products with the exception of 
juice drinks and juice drink products is established as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC17SE91.002

    (d) Yields for determining the product's contribution toward meal 
pattern requirements must be calculated using the Food Buying Guide for 
Child Nutrition Programs (Program AID Number 1331).
    5. In the event a company uses the CN logo and CN label statement 
inappropriately, the company will be directed to discontinue the use of 
the logo and statement and the matter will be referred to the 
appropriate agency for action to be taken against the company.
    6. Products that bear a CN label statement as set forth in paragraph 
3(c) carry a warranty. This means that if a food service authority 
participating in the Child Nutrition Programs purchases a CN labeled 
product and uses it in accordance with the manufacturer's directions, 
the school or institution will not have an audit claim filed against it

[[Page 74]]

for the CN labeled product for noncompliance with the meal pattern 
requirements of 7 CFR 210.10 or 210.10a, whichever is applicable, 
Sec. 220.8 or Sec. 220.8a, whichever is applicable, Secs. 225.20, and 
226.20. If a State or Federal auditor finds that a product that is CN 
labeled does not actually meet the meal pattern requirements claimed on 
the label, the auditor will report this finding to FCS. FCS will prepare 
a report of the findings and send it to the appropriate divisions of 
FSIS and AMS of the USDA, National Marine Fisheries Services of the 
USDC, Food and Drug Administration, or the Department of Justice for 
action against the company. Any or all of the following courses of 
action may be taken:
    (a) The company's CN label may be revoked for a specific period of 
time;
    (b) The appropriate agency may pursue a misbranding or mislabeling 
action against the company producing the product;
    (c) The company's name will be circulated to regional FCS offices;
    (d) FCS will require the food service program involved to notify the 
State agency of the labeling violation.
    7. FCS is authorized to issue operational policies, procedures, and 
instructions for the CN Labeling Program. To apply for a CN label and to 
obtain additional information on CN label application procedures write 
to: CN Labels, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Consumer 
Service, Nutrition and Technical Services Division, 3101 Park Center 
Drive, Alexandria, Virginia 22302.

[51 FR 34874, Sept. 30, 1986, as amended at 53 FR 29164, Aug. 2, 1988; 
60 FR 31216, June 13, 1995]


<R03>
PART 215--SPECIAL MILK PROGRAM FOR CHILDREN--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
215.1  General purpose and scope.
215.2  Definitions.
215.3  Administration.
215.4  Payments of funds to States and FCSROs.
215.5  Method of payment to States.
215.6  Use of funds.
215.7  Requirements for participation.
215.8  Reimbursement payments.
215.9  Effective date for reimbursement.
215.10  Reimbursement procedures.
215.11  Special responsibilities of State agencies.
215.12  Claims against schools or child-care institutions.
215.13  Management evaluations and audits.
215.13a  Determining eligibility for free milk in child-care 
          institutions.
215.14  Nondiscrimination.
215.14a  Procurement standards.
215.15  Suspension, termination and grant closeout procedures.
215.16  Program information.
215.17  Information collection/recordkeeping--OMB assigned control 
          numbers.

Appendix to Part 215--Apportionment of Special Milk Program Funds 
          Pursuant to Child Nutrition Act of 1966, Fiscal Year 1976

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 1772, 1779.


<R05>
Sec. 215.1  General purpose and scope.

    This part announces the policies and prescribes the general 
regulations with respect to the Special Milk Program for Children, under 
the Child Nutrition Act of 1966, as amended, and sets forth the general 
requirements for participation in the program. The Act reads in 
pertinent part as follows:

    Section 3(a)(1) There is hereby authorized to be appropriated for 
the fiscal year ending June 30, 1970, and for each succeeding fiscal 
year such sums as may be necessary to enable the Secretary of 
Agriculture, under such rules and regulations as he may deem in the 
public interest, to encourage consumption of fluid milk by children in 
the United States in (A) nonprofit schools of high school grade and 
under, except as provided in paragraph (2), which do not participate in 
a meal service program authorized under this Act or the National School 
Lunch Act, and (B) nonprofit nursery schools, child care centers, 
settlement houses, summer camps, and similar nonprofit institutions 
devoted to the care and training of children, which do not participate 
in a meal service program authorized under this Act or the National 
School Lunch Act.
    (2) The limitation imposed under paragraph (1)(A) for participation 
of nonprofit schools in the special milk program shall not apply to 
split-session kindergarten programs conducted in schools in which 
children do not have access to the meal service program operating in 
schools the children attend as authorized under this Act or the National 
School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1751 et seq.).
    (3) For the purposes of this section ``United States'' means the 
fifty States, Guam, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, 
American Samoa, the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, and the 
District of Columbia.
    (4) The Secretary shall administer the special milk program provided 
for by this section to the maximum extent practicable in the same manner 
as he administered the special milk program provided for by Pub. L. 89-
642, as amended, during the fiscal year ending June 30, 1969.
    (5) Any school or nonprofit child care institution which does not 
participate in a meal

[[Page 75]]

service program authorized under this Act or the National School Lunch 
Act shall receive the special milk program upon their request.
    (6) Children who qualify for free lunches under guidelines 
established by the Secretary shall, at the option of the school involved 
(or of the local educational agency involved in the case of a public 
school) be eligible for free milk upon their request.
    (7) For the fiscal year ending June 30, 1975, and for subsequent 
school years, the minimum rate of reimbursement for a half-pint of milk 
served in schools and other eligible institutions shall not be less than 
5 cents per half-pint served to eligible children, and such minimum rate 
of reimbursement shall be adjusted on an annual basis each school year 
to reflect changes in the Producer Price Index for Fresh Processed Milk 
published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the Department of Labor.
    (8) Such adjustment shall be computed to the nearest one-fourth 
cent.
    (9) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, in no event 
shall the minimum rate of reimbursement exceed the cost to the school or 
institution of milk served to children.

[52 FR 7562, Mar. 12, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 215.2   Definitions.

    For the purpose of this part, the term:
    (a) Act means the Child Nutrition Act of 1966.
    (b) Adults means those persons not included under the definition of 
children.
    (c) [Reserved]
    (d) Child and Adult Care Food Program means the program authorized 
by section 17 of the National School Lunch Act, as amended.
    (e) Child-care institution means any nonprofit nursery school, 
child-care center, settlement house, summer camp, service institution 
participating in the Summer Food Program for Children pursuant to part 
225 of this chapter, institution participating in the Child and Adult 
Care Food Program pursuant to part 226 of this chapter, or similar 
nonprofit institution devoted to the care and training of children. The 
term ``child-care institution'' also includes a nonprofit agency to 
which such institution has delegated authority for the operation of a 
milk program in the institution. It does not include any institution 
falling within the definition of ``School'' in paragraph (v) of this 
section.
    (e-1) Children means persons under 19 chronological years of age in 
child-care institutions as defined in Sec. 215.2(e); or persons under 21 
chronological years of age attending schools as defined in 
Sec. 215.2(v)(3) and (4) of this part; or students, including students 
who are mentally or physically handicapped as defined by the State and 
who are participating in a school program established for the mentally 
or physically handicapped, of high school grade or under as determined 
by the State educational agency in schools as defined in 
Sec. 215.2(v)(1) and (2) of this part.
    (e-2) CND means the Child Nutrition Division of the Food and 
Consumer Service of the Department.
    (f) FCS means the Food and Consumer Service of the U.S. Department 
of Agriculture.
    (g) FCSRO means Food and Consumer Services Regional Offices, of the 
Food and Consumer Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
    (h) Cost of milk means the net purchase price paid by the school or 
child-care institution to the milk supplier for milk delivered to the 
school or child-care institution. This shall not include any amount paid 
to the milk supplier for servicing, rental of or installment purchase of 
milk service equipment.
    (i) Department means the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
    (j) Family means a group of related or nonrelated individuals, who 
are not residents of an institution or boarding house, but who are 
living as one economic unit.
    (j-1) Free milk means milk for which neither the child nor any 
member of his family pays or is required to work in the school or child-
care institution or in its food service.
    (k) Fiscal year means the period of 12 calendar months beginning 
October 1, 1977, and each October 1 of any calendar year thereafter and 
ending September 30 of the following calendar year.
    (l) Milk means pasteurized fluid types of unflavored or flavored 
whole milk, lowfat milk, skim milk, or cultured buttermilk which meet 
State and local standards for such milk. In Alaska, Hawaii, American 
Samoa, Guam, Puerto Rico, the Trust Territory of the Pacific

[[Page 76]]

Islands, and the Virgin Islands, if a sufficient supply of such types of 
fluid milk cannot be obtained, milk shall include reconstituted or 
recombined milk. All milk should contain vitamins A and D at levels 
specified by the Food and Drug Administration and consistent with State 
and local standards for such milk.
    (m) National School Lunch Program means the program under which 
general cash-for-food assistance and special cash assistance are made 
available to schools pursuant to part 210 of this chapter.
    (n) Needy children means: (1) Children who attend schools 
participating in the Program and who meet the School Food Authority's 
eligibility standards for free milk approved by the State agency, or 
FCSRO where applicable, under part 245 of this chapter; and (2) children 
who attend child-care institutions participating in the Program and who 
meet the eligibility standards for free milk approved by the State 
agency, or FCSRO where applicable, under Sec. 215.13a of this part.
    (o) [Reserved]
    (p) Nonpricing program means a program which does not sell milk to 
children. This shall include any such program in which children are 
normally provided milk, along with food and other services, in a school 
or child-care institution financed by a tuition, boarding, camping or 
other fee, or by private donations or endowments.
    (q) Nonprofit milk service means milk service maintained by or on 
behalf of the school or child-care institution for the benefit of the 
children, all of the income from which is used solely for the operation 
or improvement of such milk service.
    (r) Nonprofit means exempt from income tax under the Internal 
Revenue Code, as amended.
    (s) OA means the Office of Audit of the United States Department of 
Agriculture.
    (s-1) OIG means the Office of the Inspector General of the 
Department.
    (t) Pricing program means a program which sells milk to children. 
This shall include any such program in which maximum use is made of 
Program reimbursement payments in lowering, or reducing to ``zero,'' 
wherever possible, the price per half pint which children would normally 
pay for milk.
    (u) Program means the Special Milk Program for Children.
    (u-1) Reimbursement means financial assistance paid or payable to 
participating schools and child-care institutions for milk served to 
eligible children.
    (v) School means: (1) An educational unit of high school grade or 
under, recognized as part of the educational system in the State and 
operating under public or nonprofit private ownership in a single 
building or complex of buildings; (2) any public or nonprofit private 
classes of preprimary grade when they are conducted in the 
aforementioned schools; (3) any public or nonprofit private residential 
child care institution, or distinct part of such institution, which 
operates principally for the care of children, and, if private, is 
licensed to provide residential child care services under the 
appropriate licensing code by the State or a subordinate level of 
government, except for residential summer camps which participate in the 
Summer Food Service Program for Children, Job Corps centers funded by 
the Department of Labor, and private foster homes. The term residential 
child care institutions includes, but is not limited to: Homes for the 
mentally, emotionally or physically impaired, and unmarried mothers and 
their infants; group homes; halfway houses; orphanages; temporary 
shelters for abused children and for runaway children; long-term care 
facilities for chronically ill children; and juvenile detention centers. 
A long-term care facility is a hospital, skilled nursing facility, 
intermediate care facility, or distinct part thereof, which is intended 
for the care of children confined for 30 days or more; or (4) with 
respect to the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, nonprofit child care centers 
certified as such by the Governor of Puerto Rico.
    (w) School Breakfast Program means the program authorized by section 
4 of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966, as amended.
    (w-1) School Food Authority means the governing body which is 
responsible for the administration of one or more schools and which has 
the legal authority to operate a milk program therein.

[[Page 77]]

The term ``School Food Authority'' also includes a nonprofit agency to 
which such governing body has delegated authority for the operation of a 
milk program in a school.
    (x) School year means the period of 12 calendar months beginning 
July 1, 1977, and each July 1 of any calendar year thereafter and ending 
June 30 of the following calendar year.
    (x-1) 7 CFR part 3015 means the Uniform Federal Assistance 
Regulations published by the Department to implement Office of 
Management and Budget Circulars A-21, A-87, A-102, A-110, A-122, and A-
128; the Single Audit Act of 1984 (31 U.S.C. 7501 et seq.); and 
Executive Order 12372.

    Note: OMB Circulars, referred to in this definition, are available 
from the EOP Publications, New Executive Office Building, 726 Jackson 
Place NW., Room 2200, Washington, DC 20503.

    (x-2) Split-session means an educational program operating for 
approximately one-half of the normal school day.
    (y) State means any of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, the 
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa or 
the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands.
    (z) State agency means the State educational agency or any other 
State agency that has been designated by the Governor or other 
appropriate executive or legislative authority of the State and approved 
by the Department to administer the Program.
    (aa) Summer Food Service Program for Children means the program 
authorized by section 13 of the National School Lunch Act, as amended.

(Sec. 11, Pub. L. 95-166, 91 Stat. 1337 (42 U.S.C. 1772, 1753, 1766; 
sec. 10(a), Pub. L. 95-627, 92 Stat. 3623 (42 U.S.C. 1760; sec. 10(d)), 
Pub. L. 95-627, 92 Stat. 3624 (42 U.S.C. 1757); sec. 14, Pub. L. 95-627, 
92 Stat. 3625-3626; sec. 205, Pub. L. 96-499, The Omnibus Reconciliation 
Act of 1980, 94 Stat. 2599; secs. 807 and 808, Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 
521-535 (42 U.S.C. 1772, 1784, 1760))

[32 FR 12587, Aug. 31, 1967]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 215.2, 
see the List of CFR Sections Affected appearing in the Finding Aids 
section of this volume.


<R05>
Sec. 215.3   Administration.

    (a) Within the Department, FCS shall act on behalf of the Department 
in the administration of the Program. Within FCS, CND shall be 
responsible for Program administration.
    (b) Within the States, to the extent practicable and permissible 
under State law, responsibility for the administration of the Program in 
schools and child-care institutions shall be in the educational agency 
of the State: Provided, however, That another State agency, upon request 
by the Governor or other appropriate State executive or legislative 
authority, may be approved to administer the Program in schools as 
defined in Sec. 215.2(v)(3) or Sec. 215.2(v)(4) or in child-care 
institutions.
    (c) FCSRO shall administer the Program in any school as defined in 
Sec. 215.2(v)(1), Sec. 215.2(v)(2) or Sec. 215.2(v)(3) or in any child-
care institution as defined in Sec. 215.2(e) wherein the State agency is 
not permitted by law to disburse Federal funds paid to it under the 
Program; Provided, however, That FCSRO shall also administer the Program 
in all other schools and child-care institutions which have been under 
continuous FCS administration since October 1, 1980 unless the 
administration of such schools and institutions is assumed by a State 
agency. References in this part to ``FCSRO where applicable'' are to 
FCSRO as the agency administering the Program to schools or child-care 
institutions within certain States.
    (d) Each State agency desiring to take part in the Program shall 
enter into a written agreement with the Department for the 
administration of the Program in the State in accordance with the 
provisions of this part. Such agreement shall cover the operation of the 
Program during the period specified therein and may be extended at the 
option of the Department.

(Secs. 804, 816 and 817, Pub. L. 97-35; 95 Stat. 521-535 (42 U.S.C. 
1753, 1756, 1759, 1771 and 1785))

[Amdt. 14, 41 FR 31174, July 27, 1976, as amended by Amdt. 24, 47 FR 
14133 Apr. 2, 1982; Amdt. 36, 54 FR 2989, Jan. 23, 1989]

[[Page 78]]


<R05>
Sec. 215.4  Payments of funds to States and FCSROs.

    (a) For each fiscal year, the Secretary shall make payments to each 
State agency at such times as he may determine from the funds 
appropriated for Program reimbursement. Subject to Sec. 215.11(c)(2), 
the total of these payments for each State for any fiscal year shall be 
limited to the amount of reimbursement payable to School Food 
Authorities and child care institutions under Sec. 215.8 of this part 
for the total number of half-pints of milk served under the Program to 
eligible children from October 1 to September 30.
    (b) Each State agency shall be responsible for controlling Program 
reimbursement payments so as to keep within the funds made available to 
it, and for the timely reporting to FCS of the number of half pints of 
milk actually served. The Secretary shall increase or decrease the 
available level of funding by adjusting the State agency's Letter of 
Credit when appropriate.

(Pub. L. 97-370, 96 Stat. 1806)

[Amdt. 14, 41 FR 31174, July 27, 1976, as amended by Amdt. 30, 49 FR 
18986, May 4, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 215.5   Method of payment to States.

    (a) Funds to be paid to any State shall be made available by means 
of Letters of Credit issued by FCS in favor of the State agency. The 
State agency shall:
    (1) Obtain funds needed to reimburse School Food Authorities and 
child-care institutions through presentation by designated State 
officials of a Payment Voucher on Letter of Credit (Treasury Form GFO 
7578) in accordance with procedures prescribed by FCS and approved by 
the U.S. Treasury Department; (2) submit requests for funds only at such 
times and in such amounts as will permit prompt payment of claims; (3) 
use the funds received from such requests without delay for the purpose 
for which drawn. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, if funds are 
made available by Congress for the operation of the Program under a 
continuing resolution, Letters of Credit shall reflect only the amount 
available for the effective period of the resolution.
    (b) [Reserved]
    (c) The State agency shall release to FCS any Federal funds made 
available to it under the Program which are unobligated at the end of 
each fiscal year. Release of funds by the State agency shall be made as 
soon as practicable but in no event later than 30 days following demand 
by FCSRO, and shall be reflected by a related adjustment in the State 
agency's Letter of Credit.

[Amdt. 13, 39 FR 28416, Aug. 7, 1974, as amended by Amdt. 14, 41 FR 
31174, July 27, 1976]


<R05>
Sec. 215.6   Use of funds.

    (a) Federal funds made available under the Program shall be used to 
encourage the consumption of milk through reimbursement payments to 
schools and child-care institutions in connection with the purchase and 
service of milk to children in accordance with the provisions of this 
part: Provided, however, That, with the approval of FCS, any State 
agency, or FCSRO where applicable, may reserve for use in carrying out 
special developmental projects an amount equal to not more than 1 per 
centum of the Federal funds so made available for any fiscal year.
    (b) Whoever embezzles, willfully misapplies, steals, or obtains by 
fraud any funds, assets, or property provided under this part, whether 
received directly or indirectly from the Department, shall: (1) If such 
funds, assets, or property are of a value of $100 or more, be fined not 
more than $10,000 or imprisoned not more than 5 years or both; or (2) if 
such funds, assets, or property are of a value of less than $100, be 
fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than one year or both.
    (c) Whoever receives, conceals, or retains to his use or gain funds, 
assets, or property provided under this part, whether received directly 
or indirectly from the Department, knowing such funds, assets, or 
property have been embezzled, willfully misapplied, stolen, or obtained 
by fraud, shall be subject

[[Page 79]]

to the same penalties provided in paragraph (b) of this section.

(Sec. 10(a), Pub. L. 95-627, 92 Stat. 3623 (42 U.S.C. 1760; sec. 
10(d)(3), Pub. L. 95-627, 92 Stat. 3624 (42 U.S.C. 1757); sec. 14, Pub. 
L. 95-627, 92 Stat. 3625-3626; 44 U.S.C. 3506))

[Amdt. 14, 41 FR 31174, July 27, 1976, as amended by Amdt. 18, 44 FR 
37898, June 29, 1979; 47 FR 746, Jan. 7, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 215.7  Requirements for participation.

    (a) Any school or nonprofit child care institution shall receive the 
Special Milk Program upon request provided it does not participate in a 
meal service program authorized under the Child Nutrition Act of 1966 or 
the National School Lunch Act; except that schools with such meal 
service may receive the Special Milk Program upon request only for the 
children attending split-session kindergarten programs who do not have 
access to the meal service. Each School Food Authority or child-care 
institution shall make written application to the State agency, or FCSRO 
where applicable, for any school or child-care institution in which it 
desires to operate the Program, if such school or child-care institution 
did not participate in the Program in the prior fiscal year.
    (b) Any School Food Authority or child care institution 
participating in the Program may elect to serve free milk to children 
eligible for free meals. Upon application for the Program and thereafter 
at least annually, each School Food Authority or child care institution:
    (1) Shall be required by the State agency, or FCSRO where 
applicable, to state whether or not it wishes to provide free milk in 
the schools or institutions participating under its jurisdiction and
    (2) If it so wishes to provide free milk, shall also submit for 
approval a free milk policy statement which, if for a school, shall be 
in accordance with part 245 of this chapter or, if for a child care 
institution, shall be in accordance with Sec. 215.13a of this part.
    (c) The application shall include information in sufficient detail 
to enable the State agency, or FCSRO where applicable, to determine 
whether the School Food Authority or child-care institution is eligible 
to participate in the Program and extent of the need for Program 
payments.
    (d) The State agency, or the Department through FCSRO where 
applicable, shall enter into a written agreement with each School Food 
Authority or child-care institution approved for participation in the 
Program. Such agreement shall provide that the School Food Authority or 
child-care institution shall, with respect to participating schools and 
child-care institutions under its jurisdiction:
    (1) Operate a nonprofit milk service. However, school food 
authorities may use facilities, equipment, and personnel supported with 
funds provided to a school food authority under this part to support a 
nonprofit nutrition program for the elderly, including a program funded 
under the Older Americans Act of 1965 (42 U.S.C. 3001 et seq.).
    (2) If electing to provide free milk (i) serve milk free to all 
eligible children, at times that milk is made available to nonneedy 
children under the Program; and (ii) make no discrimination against any 
needy child because of his inability to pay for the milk.
    (3) Comply with the requirements of the Department's regulations 
respecting nondiscrimination (7 CFR part 15);
    (4) Claim reimbursement only for milk as defined in this part and in 
accordance with the provisions of Sec. 215.8 and Sec. 215.10;
    (5) Submit Claims for Reimbursement in accordance with Sec. 215.10 
of this part and procedures established by the State agency or FCSRO 
where applicable;
    (6) Maintain a financial management system as prescribed by the 
State agency, or FCSRO where applicable;
    (7) Upon request, make all records pertaining to its milk program 
available to the State agency and to FCS or OA for audit and 
administrative review, at any reasonable time and place. Such records 
shall be retained for a period of three years after the end of the 
fiscal year to which they pertain, except that, if audit findings have 
not been resolved, the records shall be retained beyond the three-year 
period as long as required for the resolution of the issues raised by 
the audit;
    (8) Retain the individual applications for free milk submitted by 
families for

[[Page 80]]

a period of three years after the end of the fiscal year to which they 
pertain, except that, if audit findings have not been resolved, the 
records shall be retained beyond the three-year period as long as 
required for the resolution of the issues raised by the audit.
    (e) State requirements. Nothing contained in this part shall prevent 
a State agency from imposing additional requirements for participation 
in the Program which are not inconsistent with the provision of this 
part.

(Sec. 11, Pub. L. 95-166, 91 Stat. 1337 (42 U.S.C. 1772, 1753, 1766); 
sec. 5, Pub. L. 95-627, 92 Stat. 3619 (42 U.S.C. 1772); secs. 801, 803, 
812; Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 521-535 (42 U.S.C. 1753, 1759(a), 1773, 
1758); 44 U.S.C. 3506)

[Amdt. 13, 39 FR 28416, Aug. 7, 1974, as amended by Amdt. 14, 41 FR 
31174, July 27, 1976; Amdt. 16, 43 FR 1059, Jan. 6, 1978; 44 FR 10700, 
Feb. 23, 1979; Amdt. 17, 44 FR 33047, June 8, 1979; 46 FR 51635, Oct. 
20, 1981; 47 FR 745, Jan. 7, 1982; Amdt. 30, 49 FR 18986, 18987, May 4, 
1984; 52 FR 7562, Mar. 12, 1987; 52 FR 15298, Apr. 28, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 215.8   Reimbursement payments.

    (a) [Reserved]
    (b)(1) The rate of reimbursement per half-pint of milk purchased and 
(i) served in nonpricing programs to all children; (ii) served to all 
children in pricing programs by institutions and School Food Authorities 
not electing to provide free milk; and (iii) served to children other 
than needy children in pricing programs by institutions and School Food 
Authorities electing to provide free milk shall be the rate announced by 
the Secretary for the applicable school year. However, in no event shall 
the reimbursement for each half-pint (236 ml.) of milk served to 
children exceed the cost of the milk to the school or child care 
institution.
    (2) The rate of reimbursement for milk purchased and served free to 
needy children in pricing programs by institutions and School Food 
Authorities electing to provide free milk shall be the average cost of 
milk, i.e., the total cost of all milk purchased during the claim 
period, divided by the total number of purchased half-pints.
    (c) Schools and child-care institutions having pricing programs 
shall use the reimbursement payments received to reduce the price of 
milk to children.

(Sec. 11, Pub. L. 95-166, 91 Stat. 1337 (42 U.S.C. 1772, 1753, 1766); 
sec. 5, Pub. L. 95-627, 92 Stat. 3619 (42 U.S.C. 1772); Omnibus 
Reconciliation Act of 1980, sec. 209, Pub. L. 96-499, 94 Stat. 2599; 
secs. 807 and 808, Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 521-535, 42 U.S.C. 1772, 
1784, 1760; secs. 805 and 819, Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 521-535 (42 
U.S.C. 1773))

[Amdt. 13, 39 FR 28416, Aug. 7, 1974, as amended by Amdt. 16, 43 FR 
1060, Jan. 6, 1978; 44 FR 10700, Feb. 23, 1979; Amdt. 17, 44 FR 33047, 
June 8, 1979; 46 FR 51365, Oct. 20, 1981; Amdt. 23, 47 FR 14134, Apr. 2, 
1982]


<R05>
Sec. 215.9   Effective date for reimbursement.

    (a) A State Agency, or FCSRO where applicable, may grant written 
approval to begin operations under the Program prior to the receipt of 
the application from the School Food Authority or child-care 
institution. Such written approval shall be attached to the subsequently 
filed application, and the agreement executed by the School Food 
Authority or child-care institution shall be effective from the date 
upon which the School Food Authority or child-care institution was 
authorized to begin operations: Provided, however, That such effective 
date shall not be earlier than the calendar month preceding the calendar 
month in which the agreement is executed by the State Agency or by the 
Department.
    (b) Reimbursement payments pursuant to Sec. 215.8 shall be made for 
milk purchased and served to children at any time during the effective 
period of an agreement between a School Food Authority or child care 
institution and the State agency or the Department.

(Sec. 11, Pub. L. 95-166, 91 Stat. 1337 (42 U.S.C. 1772, 1753, 1766))

[32 FR 12587, Aug. 31, 1967, as amended by Amdt. 5, 37 FR 14686, July 
22, 1972; Amdt. 13, 39 FR 28417, Aug. 7, 1974; Amdt. 16, 43 FR 1060, 
Jan. 6, 1978; 44 FR 10700, Feb. 23, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 215.10  Reimbursement procedures.

    (a) To be entitled to reimbursement under this part, each School 
Food Authority shall submit to the State agency, or FCSRO where 
applicable, a monthly Claim for Reimbursement.

[[Page 81]]

    (b) Claims for Reimbursement shall include data in sufficient detail 
to justify the reimbursement claimed and to enable the State agency to 
provide the Reports of School Program Operations required under 
Sec. 215.11(c)(2). Unless otherwise approved by FCS, the Claim for 
Reimbursement for any month shall include only milk served in that month 
except if the first or last month of Program operations for any year 
contains 10 operating days or less, such month may be added to the Claim 
for Reimbursement for the appropriate adjacent month; however, Claims 
for Reimbursement may not combine operations occurring in two fiscal 
years. A final Claim for Reimbursement shall be postmarked and/or 
submitted to the State agency, or FCSRO where applicable, not later than 
60 days following the last day of the full month covered by the claim. 
State agencies may establish shorter deadlines at their discretion. 
Claims not postmarked and/or submitted within 60 days shall not be paid 
with Program funds unless FCS determines that an exception should be 
granted. The State agency, or FCSRO where applicable, shall promptly 
take corrective action with respect to any Claim for Reimbursement as 
determined necessary through its claim review process or otherwise. In 
taking such corrective action, State agencies may make upward 
adjustments in Program funds claimed on claims filed within the 60 day 
deadline if such adjustments are completed within 90 days of the last 
day of the claim month and are reflected in the final Report of School 
Program Operations (FCS-10) for the claim month which is required under 
Sec. 215.11(c)(2). Upward adjustments in Program funds claimed which are 
not reflected in the final FCS-10 for the claim month shall not be made 
unless authorized by FCS. Downward adjustments in Program funds claimed 
shall always be made, without FCS authorization, regardless of when it 
is determined that such adjustments are necessary.
    (c) [Reserved]
    (d) In submitting a Claim for Reimbursement, each School Food 
Authority or child-care institution shall certify that the claim is true 
and correct; that records are available to support the claim; that the 
claim is in accordance with the existing agreement; and that payment 
therefor has not been received.
    (e) Milk served to adults is not eligible for reimbursement.
    (f) Any School Food Authority or child care institution which 
operates both a nonpricing and pricing milk program in the same school 
or child care institution, may elect to claim reimbursement for:
    (1) All milk purchased and served to children under the Program at 
the nonpricing rate prescribed in Sec. 215.8(b) (1), or (2) only milk 
purchased and served to children in the pricing program at the rates 
prescribed in Sec. 215.8(b) (1) and (2) for pricing programs.

(Sec. 11, Pub. L. 95-166, 91 Stat. 1337 (42 U.S.C. 1772, 1753, 1766); 
Pub. L. 97-370, 96 Stat. 1806)

[Amdt. 13, 39 FR 28417, Aug. 7, 1974, as amended by Amdt. 14, 41 FR 
31175, July 27, 1976; Amdt. 16, 43 FR 1060, Jan. 6, 1978; 44 FR 10700, 
Feb. 23, 1979; 45 FR 82622, Dec. 16, 1980; 48 FR 20896, May 10, 1983; 
Amdt. 30, 49 FR 18986, May 4, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 215.11   Special responsibilities of State agencies.

    (a) [Reserved]
    (b) Program assistance. Each State agency, or FCSRO where 
applicable, shall provide Program assistance, as follows:
    (1) Consultive, technical, and managerial personnel to administer 
the Program and monitor performance of schools and child-care 
institutions and to measure progress toward achieving Program goals.
    (2) Visits to participating schools and child-care institutions to 
ensure compliance with Program regulations and with the Department's 
nondiscrimination regulations (part 15 of this title), issued under 
title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. State agencies shall conduct 
reviews of schools participating in the Program for compliance with the 
provisions of this part when such schools are being reviewed under the 
provisions identified under Sec. 210.18(i) of this title. Compliance 
reviews of participating schools shall focus on the reviewed school's 
compliance with the required certification, counting and milk service 
procedures. School food

[[Page 82]]

authorities may appeal a denial of all or a part of the Claim for 
Reimbursement or withholding of payment arising from review activity 
conducted by the State agency under Sec. 210.18 of this title or by FCS 
under Sec. 210.30(d)(2) of this title. Any such appeal shall be subject 
to the procedures set forth under Sec. 210.18(q) of this title or 
Sec. 210.30(d)(3) of this title, as appropriate.
    (3) Documentation of such Program assistance shall be maintained on 
file by the State agency, or FCSRO where applicable.
    (c) Records and reports. (1) Each State agency shall maintain 
Program records as necessary to support the reimbursement payments made 
to child care institutions or School Food Authorities under Sec. 215.8 
and Sec. 215.10 and the reports submitted to FCS under 
Sec. 215.11(c)(2). The records may be kept in their original form or on 
microfilm, and shall be retained for a period of three years after the 
date of submission of the final Financial Status Report for the fiscal 
year, except that if audit findings have not been resolved, the records 
shall be retained beyond the three-year period as long as required for 
the resolution of the issues raised by the audit.
    (2) Each State agency shall submit to FCS a final Report of School 
Program Operations (FCS-10) for each month which shall be limited to 
claims submitted in accordance with Sec. 215.10(b) and which shall be 
postmarked and/or submitted no later than 90 days following the last day 
of the month covered by the report. States shall not receive Program 
funds for any month for which the final report is not submitted within 
this time limit unless FCS grants an exception. Upward adjustments to a 
State agency's report shall not be made after 90 days from the month 
covered by the report unless authorized by FCS. Downward adjustments 
shall always be made, without FCS authorization, regardless of when it 
is determined that such adjustments are necessary. Adjustments shall be 
reported to FCS in accordance with procedures established by FCS. Each 
State agency shall also submit to FCS a quarterly Financial Status 
Report (SF-269) on the use of Program funds. Such reports shall be 
postmarked and/or submitted no later than 30 days after the end of each 
fiscal year quarter. Obligations shall be reported only for the fiscal 
year in which they occur. A final Financial Status Report for each 
fiscal year shall be postmarked and/or submitted to FCS within 120 days 
after the end of the fiscal year. FCS shall not be responsible for 
reimbursing unpaid program obligations reported later than 120 days 
after the close of the fiscal year in which they were incurred.
    (d) Compliance. State agencies, or FCSROs where applicable, shall 
require School Food Authorities and child-care institutions to comply 
with applicable provisions of this part.
    (e) Investigations. Each State Agency shall promptly investigate 
complaints received or irregularities noted in connection with the 
operation of the Program and shall take appropriate action to correct 
any irregularities. State Agencies shall maintain on file evidence of 
such investigations and actions. The Office of Investigation of the 
Department (OI) shall make investigations at the request of the State 
Agency or if CND or FCSRO determines investigations by OI are 
appropriate.

(Sec. 11, Pub. L. 95-166, 91 Stat. 1337 (42 U.S.C. 1772, 1753, 1766); 44 
U.S.C. 3506; sec. 812, Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 521-535 (42 U.S.C. 
1759a))

[32 FR 12587, Aug. 31, 1967, as amended by Amdt. 13, 39 FR 28417, Aug. 
7, 1974; Amdt. 14, 41 FR 31175, July 27, 1976; 47 FR 745, Jan. 7, 1982; 
Amdt. 25, 47 FR 18564, Apr. 30, 1982; Amdt. 30, 49 FR 18987, May 4, 
1984; 56 FR 32949, July 17, 1991; 57 FR 38586, Aug. 26, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 215.12   Claims against schools or child-care institutions.

    (a) State agencies, or FCSROs where applicable, shall disallow any 
portion of a claim and recover any payment made to a School Food 
Authority or child-care institution that was not properly payable under 
this part. State agencies will use their own procedures to disallow 
claims and recover overpayments already made.
    (b) [Reserved]
    (c) The State Agency may refer any matter in connection with this 
section to FCSRO and CND for determination of the action to be taken.
    (d) Each State agency shall maintain all records pertaining to 
action taken under this section. Such records shall be retained for a 
period of three years

[[Page 83]]

after the date of the submission of the final Financial Status Report, 
except that, if audit findings have not been resolved, the records shall 
be retained beyond the three-year period as long as required for the 
resolution of the issues raised by the audit.
    (e) If CND does not concur with the State Agency action in paying a 
claim or a reclaim, or in failing to collect an overpayment FCSRO shall 
assert a claim against the State Agency for the amount of such claim, 
reclaim or overpayment. In all such cases, the State Agency shall have 
full opportunity to submit to CND evidence or information concerning the 
action taken. If in the determination of CND, the State Agency's action 
was unwarranted, the State Agency shall promptly pay to FCS the amount 
of the claim, reclaim, or overpayment.
    (f) The amounts recovered by the State Agency from schools and 
child-care institutions may be utilized, first, to make reimbursement 
payments for milk served during the fiscal year for which the funds were 
initially available, and second, to repay any State funds expended in 
the reimbursement of claims under the program and not otherwise repaid. 
Any amounts recovered which are not so utilized shall be returned to FCS 
in accordance with the requirements of Sec. 215.5(c).
    (g) With respect to schools or child-care institutions in which 
FCSRO administers the Program, when FCSRO disallows a claim or a portion 
of a claim, or makes a demand for refund of an alleged overpayment, it 
shall notify the School Food Authority or child-care institutions of the 
reasons for such disallowance or demand and the School Food Authority or 
child-care institutions shall have full opportunity to submit evidence 
or to file reclaim for any amount disallowed or demanded in the same 
manner afforded in this section to schools or child-care institutions 
administered by State Agencies.
    (h) The Secretary shall have the authority to determine the amount 
of, to settle, and to adjust any claims arising under the Program, and 
to compromise or deny such claim or any part thereof. The Secretary 
shall also have the authority to waive such claims if the Secretary 
determines that to do so would serve the purposes of the Program. This 
provision shall not diminish the authority of the Attorney General of 
the United States under section 516 of Title 28, U.S. Code, to conduct 
litigation on behalf of the United States.

(47 FR 745, Jan. 7, 1982 (44 U.S.C. 3506; secs. 804, 816 and 817, Pub. 
L. 97-35; 95 Stat. 521-535 (42 U.S.C. 1753, 1756, 1759, 1771 and 1785))

[32 FR 12587, Aug. 31, 1967, as amended by Amdt. 5, 37 FR 14686, July 
22, 1972; Amdt. 13, 39 FR 28418, Aug. 7, 1974; Amdt. 14, 41 FR 31175, 
July 27, 1976; 47 FR 745, Jan. 7, 1982; Amdt. 24, 47 FR 14133, Apr. 2, 
1982]


<R05>
Sec. 215.13  Management evaluations and audits.

    (a)(1) The State agency shall ensure that all organizations within 
the State that administer or participate in the Program covered by this 
part comply with the audit requirements of 7 CFR part 3015. The term 
``organization'', as used in this section, shall refer to the entity 
whose financial management system controls the receipt, custody and 
disbursement of the Federal grant funds made available for the Program. 
The audits shall ascertain the effectiveness of the financial management 
systems and internal procedures that have been established by the 
auditee organization to meet the terms and conditions of its Federal 
grants. It is not required that the Program covered by this part be 
included in every audit. Rather, the audits shall be conducted on an 
organization-wide basis, and shall include an appropriate random 
sampling of Federal grant programs administered or operated by the 
auditee organization. The Program covered by this part shall be 
adequately represented in the universe from which each such sample is 
selected.
    (2) The State agency, or FCSRO where applicable, shall establish 
procedures to ensure that it obtains the following information 
pertaining to each School Food Authority or child-care institution 
organization under its jurisdiction:
    (i) The names of the Federal grant programs included in each audit 
obtained by the School Food Authority or child-care institution pursuant 
to the requirements of this part, regardless of whether such programs 
include

[[Page 84]]

the Program covered by this part; and (ii) the nature of any 
deficiencies intrinsic to the auditee's grants management system as 
revealed by audit. When system deficiencies, as discussed in the 
preceding sentence, are reported in audits that did not specifically 
test the Program covered by this part, the State agency, or FCSRO where 
applicable, should make, or cause to be made, follow-up audits to 
determine the impact of such deficiencies upon the Program covered by 
this part. The State agency, or FCSRO where applicable, shall establish 
procedures to assure timely and appropriate resolution of audit findings 
and recommendations, including findings relating to deficiencies such as 
those cited in paragraph (a)(2)(ii) of this section, which may impact 
upon the Program covered by this part.
    (3) Audits shall be made in accordance with generally accepted 
auditing standards, including the standards published by the General 
Accounting Office, Standards for Audit of Governmental Organizations, 
Programs, Activities and Functions. Audits may be made by any of the 
following audit groups:
    (i) School Food Authority and State agency staff auditors who are 
totally independent of the auditee;
    (ii) State Auditors General;
    (iii) State Comptrollers;
    (iv) Other comparable independent State audit groups;
    (v) Certified Public Accountants or
    (vi) State licensed public accountants.
    (4) Except as provided for in this section, each organization at the 
State agency, School Food Authority and child-care institution level 
shall obtain audits, meeting the conditions discussed in this section, 
on a continuing basis or at scheduled intervals, usually annually, but 
not less frequently than once every 2 years. The State agency, or FCSRO 
where applicable, may elect not to require this audit frequency of 
School Food Authority organizations to which both of the following 
conditions apply:
    (i) The only Federal grant program or programs operated by the 
School Food Authority organization are the Program covered by this part, 
the National School Lunch Program, the School Breakfast Program, or any 
combination of such programs; and
    (ii) The level of Federal grant funds disbursed to the School Food 
Authority organization in any fiscal year does not exceed $10,000: 
Provided, however, That the State agency, or FCSRO where applicable, 
shall make or require an audit of such a School Food Authority when 
conditions indicate a need for such an audit. The provision of the 
preceding sentence does not apply to child-care institutions as defined 
in Sec. 215.2(e) of this part.
    (b) While OA shall rely to the fullest extent feasible upon State 
sponsored audits, it shall, whenever considered necessary:
    (1) Make audits on a statewide basis,
    (2) Perform on-site test audits, and
    (3) Review audit reports and related working papers of audits 
performed by or for State agencies.
    (c) Use of audit guides available from OA is encouraged. When these 
guides are utilized, OA will coordinate its audits with State sponsored 
audits to form a network of intergovernmental audit systems.
    (d) Each State agency shall provide FCS with full opportunity to 
conduct management evaluations (including visits to schools and child-
care institutions) of any operations of the State agency under the 
Program and shall provide OA with full opportunity to conduct audits 
(including visits to schools and child-care institutions) of all 
operations of the State agency under the Program. Each State agency 
shall make available its records, including records of the receipt and 
expenditure of funds under the Program, upon a reasonable request by FCS 
or OA. OA shall also have the right to make audits of the records and 
operations of any school or child-care institution.
    (e) In conducting management evaluations, reviews or audits for any 
fiscal year, the State agency, FCS, or OIG may disregard any overpayment 
if the total overpayment does not exceed $600 or, in the case of State 
agency claims in State administered Programs, it does not exceed the 
amount established under State law, regulations or procedure as a 
minimum amount for which

[[Page 85]]

claim will be made for State losses but not to exceed $600. However, no 
overpayment is to be disregarded where there is substantial evidence of 
violations of criminal law or civil fraud statutes.

(Secs. 805 and 819, Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 521-535 (42 U.S.C. 1773); 
sec. 812, Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 521-535 (42 U.S.C. 1759a))

[Amdt. 14, 41 FR 31175, July 27, 1976, as amended at 43 FR 58925, Dec. 
22, 1978; Amdt. 23, 47 FR 14135, Apr. 2, 1982; Amdt. 25, 47 FR 18564, 
Apr. 30, 1982; Amdt. 36, 54 FR 2990, Jan. 23, 1989; 57 FR 38586, Aug. 
26, 1992; 59 FR 1894, Jan. 13, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 215.13a  Determining eligibility for free milk in child-care institutions.

    (a) General. Child care institutions which operate pricing programs 
may elect to make free milk available, as set forth in Sec. 215.7(d)(2), 
to children who meet the approved eligibility criteria. Such child care 
institutions shall determine the children who are eligible for free milk 
and assure that there is no physical segregation of, or other 
discrimination against, or overt identification of, children unable to 
pay the full price for milk.
    (b) Action by State agencies and FCSROs. Each State agency, or FCSRO 
where applicable, upon application for the program by a child care 
institution operating a pricing program, and annually thereafter, shall 
require the institution to state whether or not it wishes to serve free 
milk to eligible children at times that milk is provided under the 
Program. It shall annually require each child care institution electing 
to provide free milk to submit a free milk policy statement and shall 
provide such institutions with a prototype free milk policy statement 
and a copy of the State's family-size income standards for determining 
eligibility for free meals and milk under the National School Lunch and 
School Breakfast Programs to assist the institutions in meeting its 
responsibilities.
    (c) Action by institutions. Each child care institution which 
operates a pricing program shall inform the State agency, or FCSRO where 
applicable, at the time it applies for Program participation and at 
least annually thereafter, whether or not it wishes to provide free 
milk. Institutions electing to provide free milk shall annually submit a 
written free milk policy statement for determining free milk eligibility 
of children under their jurisdiction, which shall contain the items 
specified in paragraph (d) of this section. Such institutions shall not 
be approved for Program participation of their agreements renewed unless 
the free milk policy has been reviewed and approved. Pending approval or 
a revision of a policy statement, the existing policy shall remain in 
effect.
    (d) Policy statement. A free milk policy statement as required in 
paragraph (c) of this section shall contain the following:
    (1) The specific criteria to be used in determining eligibility for 
free milk. These criteria shall give consideration to economic need as 
reflected by family size and income. The criteria used by the child-care 
institution may not result in the eligibility of children from families 
whose incomes exceed the State's family-size income standards for 
determining eligibility for free meals under the National School Lunch 
and School Breakfast Programs.
    (2) The method by which the child-care institution will collect 
information from families in order to determine a child's eligibility 
for free milk.
    (3) The method by which the child-care institution will collect milk 
payments so as to prevent the overt identification of children receiving 
free milk.
    (4) A hearing procedure substantially like that outlined in part 245 
of this chapter.
    (5) An assurance that there will be no discrimination against free 
milk recipients and no discrimination against any child on the basis of 
race, color, or national origin.
    (e) Public announcement of eligibility criteria. Each child care 
institution which elects to make free milk available under the Program 
shall annually make a public announcement of the availability of free 
milk to children who meet the approved eligibility criteria to the 
information media serving the area from which its attendance is drawn. 
The public announcement must also state that milk is available to all

[[Page 86]]

children in attendance without regard to race, color, or national 
origin.

(Sec. 11, Pub. L. 95-166, 91 Stat. 1337 (42 U.S.C. 1772, 1753, 1766); 
sec. 5, Pub. L. 95-627, 92 Stat. 3619 (42 U.S.C. 1772))

[Amdt. 14, 41 FR 31176, July 27, 1976, as amended by Amdt. 16, 43 FR 
1060, Jan. 6, 1978; 44 FR 10700, Feb. 23, 1979; Amdt. 17, 44 FR 33047, 
June 8, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 215.14   Nondiscrimination.

    The Department's regulations on nondiscrimination in federally 
assisted programs are set forth in part 15 of this title. The 
Department's agreements with State agencies, the State agencies' 
agreements with School Food Authorities and child-care institutions and 
the FCSRO agreements with School Food Authorities administering 
nonprofit private schools and with child-care institutions shall contain 
the assurances required by such regulations. When different types of 
milk are served to children, (a) a uniform price for each type of milk 
served shall be charged to all non-needy children in the school or 
child-care institution who purchase milk, and (b) needy children shall 
be given the opportunity to select any type of milk offered.

(44 U.S.C. 3506)

[Amdt. 13, 39 FR 28418, Aug. 7, 1974, as amended at 47 FR 745, Jan. 7, 
1982]


<R05>
Sec. 215.14a  Procurement standards.

    (a) Requirements. State agencies and School Food Authorities shall 
comply with the requirements of the Office of Management and Budget 
(OMB) Circular A-102 and the Department's Uniform Federal Assistance 
Regulations, 7 CFR part 3015, subpart S (46 FR 55658) concerning the 
procurement of supplies, food, equipment and other services with Program 
funds. These requirements are adopted by FCS to ensure that such 
materials and services are obtained for the Program efficiently and 
economically and in compliance with applicable laws and executive 
orders.
    (b) Contractual responsibilities. The standards contained in OMB 
Circular A-102 and 7 CFR part 3015, do not relieve the State agency or 
School Food Authority of any contractual responsibilities under its 
contract. The State agency or School Food Authority is the responsible 
authority, without recourse to FCS, regarding the settlement and 
satisfaction of all contractual and administrative issues arising out of 
procurements entered into in connection with the Program. This includes 
but is not limited to: Source evaluation, protests, disputes, claims, or 
other matters of a contractual nature. Matters concerning violation of 
law are to be referred to the local, State or Federal authority that has 
proper jurisdiction.
    (c) Procurement procedure. The State agency or School Food Authority 
may use their own procurement procedures which reflect applicable State 
and local laws and regulations, provided that procurements made with 
Program funds adhere to the standards set forth in OMB Circular A-102 
and 7 CFR part 3015.

(Pub. L. 79-396, 60 Stat. 231 (42 U.S.C. 1751); Pub. L. 89-642, 80 Stat. 
885-890 (42 U.S.C. 1773); Pub. L. 91-248, 84 Stat. 207 (42 U.S.C. 1759))

[Amdt. 27, 48 FR 19355, Apr. 29, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 215.15  Suspension, termination and grant closeout procedures.

    Whenever it is determined that a State agency has materially failed 
to comply with the provisions of this part, or with FCS guidelines and 
instructions, FCS may suspend or terminate the Program in whole, or in 
part, or take any other action as may be available and appropriate. A 
State agency may also terminate the Program by mutual agreement with 
FCS. FCS and the State agency shall comply with the provisions of the 
Department's Uniform Federal Assistance Regulations, 7 CFR part 3015, 
subpart N concerning grant suspension, termination and closeout 
procedures. Furthermore, the State agency, or FCSRO where applicable, 
shall apply these provisions to suspension or termination of the Program 
in School Food Authorities.

[Amdt. 30, 49 FR 18987, May 4, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 215.16   Program information.

    School Food Authorities and child-care institutions desiring 
information concerning the Program should write

[[Page 87]]

to their State educational agency, or the appropriate Food and Consumer 
Service Regional Office of FCS as indicated below:
    (a) In the States of Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New 
Hampshire, New York, Rhode Island, and Vermont: Northeast Regional 
Office, FCS, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 10 Causeway Street, Room 
501, Boston, Massachusetts 02222-1065.
    (b) In the States of Delaware, District of Columbia, Maryland, New 
Jersey, Pennsylvania, Puerto Rico, Virginia, Virgin Islands, and West 
Virginia: Mid-Atlantic Regional Office, FCS, U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Mercer Corporate Park, Corporate Boulevard, CN02150, 
Trenton, New Jersey 08650.
    (c) In the States of Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, 
Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Tennessee: Southeast 
Regional Office, FCS, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 1100 Spring 
Street, NW., Atlanta, Georgia 30367.
    (d) In the States of Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Ohio, 
and Wisconsin: Midwest Regional Office, FCS Department of Agriculture, 
50 E. Washington Street, Chicago, Illinois 60602.
    (e) In the States of Arkansas, Louisiana, New Mexico, Oklahoma, 
Texas: Southwest Regional Office, Food and Consumer Service, U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, 1100 Commerce Street, Room 5-C-30, Dallas, 
Texas 75242.
    (f) In the States of Alaska, American Samoa, Arizona, California, 
Guam, Hawaii, Idaho, Nevada, Oregon, Trust Territory of the Pacific 
Islands, The Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands and 
Washington: Western Regional Office, Food and Consumer Service, U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, 550 Kearny Street, Room 400, San Francisco, 
California 94108.
    (g) In the States of Colorado, Iowa, Kansas, Missouri, Montana, 
Nebraska, North Dakota, South Dakota, Utah, and Wyoming: Mountain Plains 
Regional Office, FCS, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 1244 Speer 
Boulevard, Suite 903, Denver, Colorado 80204.

(Sec. 11, Pub. L. 95-166, 91 Stat. 1337 (42 U.S.C. 1772, 1753, 1766); 
sec. 10(a), Pub. L. 95-627, 92 Stat. 3623 (42 U.S.C. 1760); sec. 
10(d)(3), Pub. L. 95-627, 92 Stat. 3624 (42 U.S.C. 1757); sec. 14, Pub. 
L. 95-627, 92 Stat. 3625-3626); secs. 804, 816, 817 and 819, Pub. L. 97-
35, 95 Stat. 521-535 (42 U.S.C. 1753, 1756, 1759, 1771, 1773 and 1785)

[Amdt. 14, 41 FR 31178, July 27, 1976, as amended by Amdt. 18, 44 FR 
37898, June 29, 1979; Amdt. 27, 48 FR 195, Jan. 4, 1983; Amdt. 36, 54 FR 
2990, Jan. 23, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 215.17  Information collection/recordkeeping--OMB assigned control numbers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Current OMB
       7 CFR section where requirements are described          control  
                                                                number  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
215.3(d)...................................................    0584-0327
215.5(a)...................................................    0584-0005
                                                               0584-0002
215.5(c)...................................................    0584-0341
215.7 (a), (c).............................................    0584-0005
215.7 (b)(2)...............................................    0584-0026
215.7(d)...................................................    0584-0329
                                                               0584-0005
215.10 (a), (b), (d).......................................    0584-0005
                                                               0584-0284
215.11 (b), (c)(1), (e)....................................    0584-0005
215.11(c)(2)...............................................    0584-0002
                                                               0584-0341
215.12 (a), (d), (e), (g)..................................    0584-0005
215.13(a)..................................................    0584-0005
215.13a(a)-(e).............................................    0584-0026
215.14.....................................................    0584-0005
215.14a(a)-(c).............................................    0584-0005
215.15.....................................................    0584-0005
------------------------------------------------------------------------

[50 FR 53258, Dec. 31, 1985]

   Appendix to Part 215--Apportionment of Special Milk Program Funds 
        Pursuant to Child Nutrition Act of 1966, Fiscal Year 1976

    Pursuant to section 3 of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966, as 
amended, milk assistance funds available for the fiscal year ending June 
30, 1976, are apportioned among the States as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                Withheld
                                       Total         State        for   
              State                apportionment     agency     private 
                                                                schools 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Alabama..........................    $2,169,198    $2,123,262    $45,936
Alaska...........................        35,728        35,728  .........
Arizona..........................       257,241       257,241  .........
Arkansas.........................     1,136,150     1,093,276     42,874
California.......................     7,301,774     7,301,774  .........
Colorado.........................       929,948       856,450     73,498

[[Page 88]]

                                                                        
Connecticut......................     1,778,232     1,778,232  .........
Delaware.........................       285,824       285,824  .........
District of Columbia.............       146,995       146,995  .........
Florida..........................     1,379,099     1,379,099  .........
Georgia..........................     2,599,975     2,546,893     53,082
Hawaii...........................       139,849       116,371     23,478
Idaho............................       118,413       118,413  .........
Illinois.........................     6,758,710     6,758,710  .........
Indiana..........................     2,723,491     2,723,491  .........
Iowa.............................     1,336,226     1,336,226  .........
Kansas...........................       995,279       995,279  .........
Kentucky.........................     2,390,711     2,390,711  .........
Louisiana........................       835,014       835,014  .........
Maine............................       750,287       670,665     79,622
Maryland.........................     2,525,456     2,525,456  .........
Massachusetts....................     3,561,567     3,561,567  .........
Michigan.........................     4,944,750     4,944,750  .........
Minnesota........................     2,400,919     2,400,919  .........
Mississippi......................       996,300       996,300  .........
Missouri.........................     2,017,099     1,935,435     81,664
Montana..........................       204,160       169,453     34,707
Nebraska.........................      $616,562      $526,732    $89,830
Nevada...........................       110,246        90,246     20,000
New Hampshire....................       644,124       644,124  .........
New Jersey.......................     4,006,636     4,006,636  .........
New Mexico.......................       741,100       327,676    413,424
New York.........................     8,967,718     8,967,718  .........
North Carolina...................     4,839,608     4,839,608  .........
North Dakota.....................       289,907       258,262     31,645
Ohio.............................     7,795,841     7,121,093    674,748
Oklahoma.........................       955,468       955,468  .........
Oregon...........................       835,013       805,410     29,603
Pennsylvania.....................     3,551,359     3,551,359  .........
Rhode Island.....................       489,983       489,983  .........
South Carolina...................     1,131,046     1,047,340     83,706
South Dakota.....................       308,281       308,281  .........
Tennessee........................     3,131,811     3,052,189     79,622
Texas............................     4,478,245     4,278,168    200,077
Utah.............................       198,035       198,035  .........
Vermont..........................       407,299       407,299  .........
Virginia.........................     2,286,589     2,141,636    144,953
Washington.......................     1,471,992     1,202,501    269,491
West Virginia....................       483,859       483,859  .........
Wisconsin........................     3,561,567     3,561,567  .........
Wyoming..........................        59,206        59,206  .........
                                  --------------------------------------
                                                                        
    Total........................   102,079,890    99,607,930  2,471,960
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Note: The remainder of the $144,000,000 appropriated is distributed 
as follows: $889,000 for administrative expenses; $1,031,110 in reserve 
to meet unforeseen contingencies; and $40,000,000 proposed for 
rescission.

(Secs. 2, 3, 6 and 8-16, 80 Stat. 885-890; 42 U.S.C. 1771, 1772, 1775, 
1777-1785)

[41 FR 7752, Feb. 20, 1976; 41 FR 9533, Mar. 5, 1976]


<R03>
PART 220--SCHOOL BREAKFAST PROGRAM--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
220.1  General purpose and scope.
220.2  Definitions.
220.3  Administration.
220.4  Payment of funds to States and FCSROs.
220.5  Method of payment to States.
220.6  Use of funds.
220.7  Requirements for participation.
220.8  Nutrition standards for breakfast and menu planning alternatives.
220.8a  Breakfast components and quantities for the meal pattern.
220.9  Reimbursement payments.
220.10  Effective date for reimbursement.
220.11  Reimbursement procedures.
220.12  Competitive food services.
220.13  Special responsibilities of State agencies.
220.14  Claims against school food authorities.
220.15  Management evaluations and audits.
220.16  Procurement standards.
220.17  Prohibitions.
220.18  Suspension, termination and grant closeout procedures.
220.19  Free and reduced price breakfasts.
220.20  Program information.
220.21  Information collection/recordkeeping--OMB assigned control 
          numbers.

Appendix A to Part 220--Alternate Foods for Meals
Appendix B to Part 220--Categories of Foods of Minimal Nutritional Value
Appendix C to Part 220--Child Nutrition (CN) Labeling Program

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 1773, 1779, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 220.1   General purpose and scope.

    This part announces the policies and prescribes the regulations 
necessary to carry out the provisions of section 4 of the Child 
Nutrition Act of 1966, as amended, which authorizes payments to the 
States to assist them to initiate, maintain, or expand nonprofit 
breakfast programs in schools.

[Amdt. 25, 41 FR 34758, Aug. 17, 1976]


<R05>
Sec. 220.2   Definitions.

    For the purpose of this part the term:
    (a) Act means the Child Nutrition Act of 1966, as amended.
    (b) Breakfast means a meal which meets the nutritional requirements 
set out in Sec. 220.8 or Sec. 220.8a, whichever is applicable, and which 
is served to a child in the morning hours. The meal shall be served at 
or close to the beginning of the child's day at school.
    (c) Child means: (1) A student of high school grade or under as 
determined by the State educational agency, who is enrolled in an 
educational unit of high school grade or under as described in 
paragraphs (1) and (2) of the definition

[[Page 89]]

of ``School'', including students who are mentally or physically 
handicapped as defined by the State and who are participating in a 
school program established for the mentally or physically handicapped; 
or (2) a person under 21 chronological years of age who is enrolled in 
an institution or center as described in paragraphs (3) and (4) of the 
definition of ``School''.
    (c-1) Competitive foods means any foods sold in competition with the 
School Breakfast Program to children in food service areas during the 
breakfast period.
    (d) CND means the Child Nutrition Division of the Food and Consumer 
Service of the Department.
    (e) Department means the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
    (f) Distributing agency means a State, Federal, or private agency 
which enters into an agreement with the Department for the distribution 
of commodities pursuant to part 250 of this chapter.
    (g) Fiscal year means the period of 15 calendar months beginning 
July 1, 1976, and ending September 30, 1977; and the period of 12 
calendar months beginning October 1, 1977, and each October 1 of any 
calendar year thereafter and ending September 30 of the following 
calendar year.
    (h) FCS means the Food and Consumer Service of the Department.
    (i) FCSRO means the appropriate Food and Consumer Service Regional 
Office of the Food and Consumer Service of the Department.
    (i-1) Foods of minimal nutritional value means: (1) In the case of 
artificially sweetened foods, a food which provides less than five 
percent of the Reference Daily Intake (RDI) for each of eight specified 
nutrients per serving; (2) in the case of all other foods, a food that 
provides less than five percent of the RDI for each of eight specified 
nutrients per 100 calories and less than five percent of the RDI for 
each of eight specified nutrients per serving. The eight nutrients to be 
assessed for this purpose are: Protein, vitamin A, vitamin C, niacin, 
riboflavin, thiamin, calcium and iron. Categories of foods of minimal 
nutritional value are listed in appendix B of this part.
    (j) Free breakfast means a breakfast for which neither the child nor 
any member of his family pays or is required to work in the school or in 
the school's food service.
    (k) Infant cereal means any iron fortified dry cereal especially 
formulated and generally recognized as cereal for infants that is 
routinely mixed with formula or milk prior to consumption.
    (l) Infant formula means any iron-fortified infant formula intended 
for dietary use solely as a food for normal healthy infants excluding 
those formulas specifically formulated for infants with inborn errors of 
metabolism or digestive or absorptive problems. Infant formula, as 
served, must be in liquid state at recommended dilution.
    (m) Menu item means, under Nutrient Standard Menu Planning or 
Assisted Nutrient Standard Menu Planning, any single food or combination 
of foods. All menu items or foods offered as part of the reimbursable 
meal may be considered as contributing towards meeting the nutrition 
standards provided in Sec. 220.8, except for those foods that are 
considered as foods of minimal nutritional value as provided for in 
Sec. 220.2(i-1) which are not offered as part of a menu item in a 
reimbursable meal. For the purposes of a reimbursable breakfast, a 
minimum of three menu items must be offered, one of which shall be fluid 
milk served as a beverage or on cereal or both; under offer versus 
serve, a student may decline only one menu item.
    (n) Milk means pasteurized fluid types of unflavored or flavored 
whole milk, lowfat milk, skim milk, or cultured buttermilk which meet 
State and local standards for such milk except that, in the meal pattern 
for infants (0 to 1 year of age) milk means unflavored types of whole 
fluid milk or an equivalent quantity of reconstituted evaporated milk 
which meet such standards. In Alaska, Hawaii, American Samoa, Guam, 
Puerto Rico, the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, and the Virgin 
Islands, if a sufficient supply of such types of fluid milk cannot be 
obtained, ``milk'' shall include reconstituted or recombined milk. All 
milk should contain vitamins A and D at levels specified by the Food and 
Drug Administration and consistent with

[[Page 90]]

State and local standards for such milk.
    (o) National School Lunch Program means the Program authorized by 
the National School Lunch Act.
    (o-1) Net cash resources means all monies as determined in 
accordance with the State agency's established accounting system, that 
are available to or have accrued to a School Food Authority's nonprofit 
school food service at any given time, less cash payable. Such monies 
may include but are not limited to, cash on hand, cash receivable, 
earnings or investments, cash on deposit and the value of stocks, bonds 
or other negotiable securities.
    (o-2) Nonprofit school food service means all food service 
operations conducted by the School Food Authority principally for the 
benefit of school children, all of the revenue from which is used solely 
for the operation or improvement of such food service.
    (p) Nonprofit when applied to schools or institutions eligible for 
the Program means exempt from income tax under section 501(c)(3) of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended; or in the Commonwealth of 
Puerto Rico, certified by the Governor.
    (p-1) Nutrient Standard Menu Planning/Assisted Nutrient Standard 
Menu Planning mean ways to develop menus based on the analysis of 
nutrients in the menu items and foods offered over a school week to 
determine if specific levels for a set of key nutrients and calories 
were met. Such analysis is based on averages weighted in accordance with 
the criteria in Sec. 220.8(e)(5). Such analysis is normally done by a 
school or a school food authority. However, for the purposes of Assisted 
Nutrient Standard Menu Planning, menu planning and analysis are 
completed by other entities and shall incorporate the production 
quantities needed to accommodate the specific service requirements of a 
particular school or school food authority.
    (q) OA means the Office of Audit of the Department.
    (q-1) OI means the Office of Investigation of the Department.
    (q-2) OIG means the Office of the Inspector General of the 
Department.
    (r) Program means the School Breakfast Program.
    (s) Reduced price breakfast means a breakfast which meets all of the 
following criteria: (1) The price shall be less than the full price of 
the breakfast, (2) the price shall be 30 cents or lower, and (3) neither 
the child nor any member of his family shall be required to supply an 
equivalent value in work for the school or the school's food service.
    (t) Reimbursement means financial assistance paid or payable to 
participating schools for breakfasts meeting the requirements of 
Sec. 220.8 or Sec. 220.8, whichever is applicable, served to eligible 
children at rates assigned by the State agency, or FCSRO where 
applicable. The term ``reimbursement'' also includes financial 
assistance made available through advances to School Food Authorities.
    (t-1) Revenue when applied to nonprofit school food service means 
all monies received by or accruing to the nonprofit school food service 
in accordance with the State agency's established accounting system 
including, but not limited to, children's payments, earnings on 
investments, other local revenues, State revenues, and Federal cash 
reimbursements.
    (u) School means: (1) An educational unit of high school grade or 
under, recognized as part of the educational system in the State and 
operating under public or nonprofit private ownership in a single 
building or complex of buildings; (2) any public or nonprofit private 
classes of preprimary grade when they are conducted in the 
aforementioned schools; (3) any public or nonprofit private residential 
child care institution, or distinct part of such institution, which 
operates principally for the care of children, and, if private, is 
licensed to provide residential child care services under the 
appropriate licensing code by the State or a subordinate level of 
government, except for residential summer camps which participate in the 
Summer Food Service Program for Children, Job Corps centers funded by 
the Department of Labor, and private foster homes. The term 
``residential child care institutions'' includes, but is not limited to: 
Homes for the mentally, emotionally or physically impaired, and 
unmarried mothers and their infants; group homes;

[[Page 91]]

halfway houses; orphanages; temporary shelters for abused children and 
for runaway children; long-term care facilities for chronically ill 
children; and juvenile detention centers. A long-term care facility is a 
hospital, skilled nursing facility, intermediate care facility, or 
distinct part thereof, which is entended for the care of children 
confined for 30 days or more; or (4) with respect to the Commonwealth of 
Puerto Rico, nonprofit child care centers certified as such by the 
Governor of Puerto Rico.
    (v) School Breakfast Program means the program authorized by section 
4 of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966.
    (v-1) School in severe need means a school determined to be eligible 
for rates of reimbursement in excess of the prescribed National Average 
Payment Factors, based upon the criteria set forth in Sec. 220.9(e).
    (w) School Food Authority means the governing body which is 
responsible for the administration of one or more schools and which has 
legal authority to operate a breakfast program therein.
    (w-1) School week means the period of time used to determine 
compliance with the nutrition standards and the appropriate calorie and 
nutrient levels in Sec. 220.8. Further, if applicable, school week is 
the basis for conducting Nutrient Standard Menu Planning or Assisted 
Nutrient Standard Menu Planning for breakfasts as provided in 
Sec. 220.8(e) and Sec. 220.8(f). The period shall be a normal school 
week of five consecutive days; however, to accommodate shortened weeks 
resulting from holidays and other scheduling needs, the period shall be 
a minimum of three consecutive days and a maximum of seven consecutive 
days. Weeks in which school breakfasts are offered less than three times 
shall be combined with either the previous or the coming week.
    (x) Secretary means the Secretary of Agriculture.
    (x-1) 7 CFR part 3015 means the Uniform Federal Assistance 
Regulations published by the Department to implement Office of 
Management and Budget Circulars A-21, A-87, A-102, A-110, A-122, and A-
128; the Single Audit Act of 1984 (31 U.S.C. 7501 et seq.); and 
Executive Order 12372.

    Note: OMB Circulars, referred to in this definition, are available 
from the EOP Publications, New Executive Office Building, 726 Jackson 
Place NW., Room 2200, Washington, DC 20503.

    (y) State means any of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, the 
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, 
or the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands.
    (z) State agency means: (1) The State educational agency or (2) such 
other agency of the State as has been designated by the Governor or 
other appropriate executive or legislative authority of the State and 
approved by the Department to administer the Program in schools as 
defined in Sec. 220.2(u)(3) of this part.
    (aa) State educational agency means, as the State legislature may 
determine: (1) The chief State school officer (such as the State 
Superintendent of Public Instruction, Commissioner of Education, or 
similar officer), or (2) a board of education controlling the State 
department of education.

(Sec. 6, Pub. L. 95-627, 92 Stat. 3620 (42 U.S.C. 1760); sec. 205, Pub. 
L. 96-499, The Omnibus Reconciliation Act of 1980, 94 Stat. 2599; secs. 
801, 803, 812; Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 521-535 (42 U.S.C. 1753, 1759(a), 
1773, 1758; secs. 807 and 808, Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 521-535, 42 
U.S.C. 1772, 1784, 1760; sec. 819, Pub. L. 97-35; 95 Stat. 533 (42 
U.S.C. 1759a, 1773 and 1757))

[Amdt. 25, 41 FR 34758, Aug. 17, 1976]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 220.2, 
see the List of CFR Sections Affected in the Finding Aids section of 
this volume.


<R05>
Sec. 220.3   Administration.

    (a) Within the Department, FCS shall act on behalf of the Department 
in the administration of the Program covered by this part. Within FCS, 
CND shall be responsible for administration of the Program.
    (b) Within the States, responsibility for the administration of the 
Program in schools as defined in Sec. 220.2(u)(1), (u)(2) and (u)(4) 
shall be in the State educational agency, except that FCSRO shall 
administer the Program with respect to nonprofit private schools as 
defined in Sec. 220.2(u)(1) of any State wherein the State educational

[[Page 92]]

agency is not permitted by law to disburse Federal funds paid to it 
under the Program; Provided, however, That FCSRO shall also administer 
the Program in all other nonprofit private schools which have been under 
continuous FCS administration since October 1, 1980, unless the 
administration of such private schools is assumed by a State agency.
    (c) Within the States, responsibility for the administration of the 
Program in schools as defined in Sec. 220.2(u)(3) shall be in the State 
educational agency, or if the State educational agency cannot administer 
the Program in such schools, such other agency of the State as has been 
designated by the Governor or other appropriate executive or legislative 
authority of the State and approved by the Department to administer the 
Program in such schools: Provided, however, That FCSRO shall administer 
the Program in such schools if the State agency is not permitted by law 
to disburse Federal funds paid to it under the Program to such schools; 
and Provided, further, That FCSRO shall also administer the Program in 
all other such schools which have been under continuous FCS 
administration since October 1, 1980, unless the administration of such 
schools is assumed by a State agency.
    (d) References in this part to ``FCSRO where applicable'' are to 
FCSRO as the agency administering the Program.
    (e) Each State agency desiring to take part in any of the programs 
shall enter into a written agreement with the Department for the 
administration of the Program in the State in accordance with the 
provisions of this part. Such agreement shall cover the operation of the 
Program during the period specified therein and may be extended at the 
option of the Department.

(Sec. 804, 816 and 817, Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 521-535 (42 U.S.C. 1753, 
1756, 1759, 1771 and 1785); 44 U.S.C. 3506)

[Amdt. 25, 41 FR 34759, Aug. 17, 1976, as amended at 47 FR 745, Jan. 7, 
1982; Amdt. 42, 47 FR 14133, Apr. 2, 1982; Amdt. 56, 54 FR 2990, Jan. 
23, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 220.4   Payment of funds to States and FCSROs.

    (a) To the extent funds are available, the Secretary shall make 
breakfast assistance payments to each State agency for breakfasts served 
to children under the Program. Subject to Sec. 220.13(b)(2), the total 
of these payments for each State for any fiscal year shall be limited to 
the total amount of reimbursement payable to eligible schools within the 
State under this part for the fiscal year.
    (b) The Secretary shall prescribe by July 1 of each fiscal year 
annual adjustments to the nearest one-fourth cent in the national 
average per breakfast factors for all breakfasts and for free and 
reduced price breakfasts, that shall reflect changes in the cost of 
operating a breakfast program.
    (c) In addition to the funds made available under paragraph (a) of 
this section, funds shall be made available to the State agencies, and 
FCSROs where applicable, in such amounts as are needed to finance 
reimbursement rates assigned in accordance with the provisions of 
Sec. 220.9(c).

(Secs. 801, 803, 812; Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 521-535 (42 U.S.C. 1753, 
1759(a), 1773, 1758); Pub. L. 97-370, 96 Stat. 1806)

[38 FR 35554, Dec. 28, 1973, as amended at 40 FR 30923, July 24, 1975; 
46 FR 51367, Oct. 20, 1981; 48 FR 20896, May 10, 1983; Amdt. 49, 49 FR 
18987, May 4, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 220.5   Method of payment to States.

    Funds to be paid to any State for the School Breakfast Program shall 
be made available by means of Letters of Credit issued by FCS in favor 
of the State agency. The State agency shall:
    (a) Obtain funds needed for reimbursement to School Food Authorities 
through presentation by designated State officials of a payment Voucher 
on Letter of Credit in accordance with procedures prescribed by FCS and 
approved by the U.S. Treasury Department; (b) submit requests for funds 
only at such times and in such amounts, as will permit prompt payment of 
claims or authorized advances; and (c) use the funds received from

[[Page 93]]

such requests without delay for the purpose for which drawn.

[Amdt. 25, 41 FR 34759, Aug. 17, 1976]


<R05>
Sec. 220.6   Use of funds.

    (a) Federal funds made available under the School Breakfast Program 
shall be used by State agencies, or FCSROs where applicable, to 
reimburse or make advance payments to School Food Authorities in 
connection with breakfasts served in accordance with the provisions of 
this part. However, with the approval of FCS, any State agency, or FCSRO 
where applicable, may reserve for use in carrying out special 
developmental projects an amount up to 1 per centum of the funds earned 
in any fiscal year under the School Breakfast Program. Advance payments 
to School Food Authorities may be made at such times and in such amounts 
as are necessary to meet current obligations.
    (b) Whoever embezzles, willfully misapplies, steals, or obtains by 
fraud any funds, assets, or property provided under this part, whether 
received directly or indirectly from the Department, shall--
    (1) If such funds, assets, or property are of a value of $100 or 
more, be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned not more than 5 years 
or both; or
    (2) If such funds, assets, or property are of a value of less than 
$100, be fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than one year 
or both.
    (c) Whoever receives, conceals, or retains to his use or gain funds, 
assets, or property provided under this part, whether received directly 
or indirectly from the Department, knowing such funds, assets, or 
property have been embezzled, willfully misapplied, stolen, or obtained 
by fraud, shall be subject to the same penalties provided in paragraph 
(b) of this section.

(Sec. 10(a), Pub. L. 95-627, 92 Stat. 3623 (42 U.S.C. 1760); sec. 
10(d)(3), Pub. L. 95-627, 92 Stat. 3624 (42 U.S.C. 1757); sec. 14, Pub. 
L. 95-627, 92 Stat. 3625-3626)

[40 FR 30923, July 24, 1975, as amended by Amdt. 25, 41 FR 34759, Aug. 
17, 1976; Amdt. 28, 44 FR 37899, June 29, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 220.7   Requirements for participation.

    (a) The School Food Authority shall make written application to the 
State agency, or FCSRO where applicable, for any school in which it 
desires to operate the School Breakfast Program, if such school did not 
participate in the Program in the prior fiscal year. The School Food 
Authority shall also submit for approval, either with the application or 
at the request of the State agency, or FCSRO where applicable, a free 
and reduced price policy statement in accordance with part 245 of this 
chapter. A School Food Authority which simultaneously makes application 
for the National School Lunch Program and the School Breakfast Program 
shall submit one free and reduced price policy statement which shall 
provide that the terms, conditions, and eligibility criteria set forth 
in such policy statement shall apply to the service of free and reduced 
price lunches and to the service of free and reduced price breakfasts. 
If, at the time application is made for the School Breakfast Program, a 
School Food Authority has an approved free and reduced price policy 
statement on file with the State agency, or FCSRO where applicable, for 
the National School Lunch Program, it need only confirm in writing that 
such approved policy statement will also apply to the operation of its 
School Breakfast Program. Applications for the School Breakfast Program 
shall not be approved in the absence of an approved free and reduced 
price policy statement.
    (a-1) A school which also either participates in the National School 
Lunch Program or only receives donations of commodities for its 
nonprofit lunch program under the provisions of part 250 of this chapter 
(commodity only school) shall apply the same set of eligibility criteria 
so that children who are eligible for free lunches shall also be 
eligible for free breakfasts and children who are eligible for reduced 
price lunches shall also be eligible for reduced price breakfasts.
    (b) Applications shall solicit information in sufficient detail to 
enable the State agency to determine whether the School Food Authority 
is eligible to participate in the Program and extent of the need for 
Program payments.
    (c) Within the funds available to them, State agencies, or FCSRO's

[[Page 94]]

where applicable, shall approve for participation in the School 
Breakfast Program any school making application and agreeing to carry 
out the program in accordance with this part. State agencies, or FCSRO's 
where applicable, have a positive obligation, however, to extend the 
benefits of the School Breakfast Program to children attending schools 
in areas where poor economic conditions exist.
    (d) Any School Food Authority may employ a food service management 
company (or other nonprofit agency or nonprofit organization) in the 
conduct of its feeding operation in one or more of its schools. A School 
Food Authority that employs a food service management company shall 
remain responsible for seeing that the feeding operation is in 
conformance with its agreement with the State Agency or the FCS Regional 
Office. The contract between the School Food Authority and the food 
service management company shall expressly provide that:
    (1) The food service management company shall maintain such records 
(supported by invoices, receipts, or other evidence) as the School Food 
Authority will need to meet its responsibilities under this part, and 
shall report thereon to the School Food Authority promptly at the end of 
each month;
    (2) Any federally donated commodities received by the School Food 
Authority and made available to the food service management company 
shall enure only to the benefit to the School Food Authority's nonprofit 
school food service and be utilized therein; and
    (3) The books and records of the food service management company 
pertaining to the School Food Authority's feeding operation shall be 
available for a period of 3 years from the date of the submission of the 
final Financial Status Report, for inspection and audit by 
representatives of the State agency, of the Department, and of the 
General Accounting Office at any reasonable time and place, except that 
if audit findings have not been resolved, the records shall be retained 
beyond the three-year period as long as required for the resolution of 
the issues raised by the audit.
    (e) The State agency, or the Department through FCSRO where 
applicable, shall enter into a written agreement with each School Food 
Authority for schools approved for participation in the School Breakfast 
Program. Such agreements shall provide that the School Food Authority 
shall, with respect to participating schools under its jurisdiction:
    (1)(i) Maintain a nonprofit school food service; (ii) in accordance 
with the financial management system established under Sec. 220.13(i) of 
this part, use all revenues received by such food service only for the 
operation or improvement of that food service Except that, facilities, 
equipment, and personnel support with funds provided to a school food 
authority under this part may be used to support a nonprofit nutrition 
program for the elderly, including a program funded under the Older 
Americans Act of 1965 (42 U.S.C. 3001 et seq.); (iii) revenues received 
by the nonprofit school food service shall not be used to purchase land 
or buildings or to contruct buildings; (iv) limit its net cash resources 
to an amount that does not exceed three months average expenditure for 
its nonprofit school food service or such other amount as may be 
approved by the State agency; and (v) observe the limitations on any 
competitive food service as set forth in Sec. 220.12 of this part;
    (2) Serve breakfasts which meet the minimum requirements prescribed 
in Sec. 220.8 or Sec. 220.8a, whichever is applicable, during a period 
designated as the breakfast period by the school;
    (3) Price the breakfast as a unit;
    (4) Supply breakfast without cost or at reduced price to all 
children who are determined by the School Food Authority to be unable to 
pay the full price thereof in accordance with the free and reduced price 
policy statements approved under part 245 of this chapter;
    (5) Make no discrimination against any child because of his 
inability to pay the full price of the breakfasts;
    (6) Claim reimbursement at the assigned rates only for breakfasts 
served in accordance with the agreement;
    (7) Submit Claims for Reimbursement in accordance with Sec. 220.11 
of this part and procedures established by the State agency, or FCSRO 
where applicable;

[[Page 95]]

    (8) Maintain, in the storage, preparation and service of food, 
proper sanitation and health standards in conformance with all 
applicable State and local laws and regulations;
    (9) Purchase, in as large quantities as may be efficiently utilized 
in its nonprofit school food service, foods designated as plentiful by 
the State Agency, or CFPDO, where applicable;
    (10) Accept and use, in as large quantities as may be efficiently 
utilized in its nonprofit school food service, such foods as may be 
offered as a donation by the Department;
    (11) Maintain necessary facilities for storing, preparing, and 
serving food;
    (12) Maintain a financial management system as prescribed by the 
State agency, or FCSRO where applicable;
    (13) Upon request, make all accounts and records pertaining to its 
nonprofit school food service available to the State agency, to FCS and 
to OA for audit or review at a reasonable time and place. Such records 
shall be retained for a period of three years after the end of the 
fiscal year to which they pertain, except that if audit findings have 
not been resolved, the records shall be retained beyond the three-year 
period as long as required for the resolution of the issues raised by 
the audit;
    (14) Retain the individual application for free and reduced price 
breakfasts submitted by families for a period of three years after the 
end of the fiscal year to which they pertain; and
    (15) Comply with the requirements of the Department's regulations 
respecting nondiscrimination (7 CFR part 15).
    (f) Nothing contained in this part shall prevent the State Agency 
from imposing additional requirements for participation in the program 
which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this part.

(44 U.S.C. 3506; sec. 819, Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 533 (42 U.S.C. 1759a, 
1773 and 1757); Pub. L. 79-396, 60 Stat. 231 (42 U.S.C. 1751); Pub. L. 
89-647, 80 Stat. 885-890 (42 U.S.C. 1773); Pub. L. 91-248, 84 Stat. 207 
(42 U.S.C. 1759))

[32 FR 34, Jan. 5, 1967]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 220.7, 
see the List of CFR Sections Affected in the Finding Aids section of 
this volume.


<R05>
Sec. 220.8  Nutrition standards for breakfast and menu planning alternatives.

    (a) Nutrition standards for breakfasts for children age 2 and over. 
School food authorities shall ensure that participating schools provide 
nutritious and well-balanced breakfasts. For children age 2 and over, 
breakfasts shall be offered based on the nutrition standards provided in 
this section when averaged over a school week. For the purposes of this 
section, the nutrition standards are:
    (1) Provision of one-fourth of the Recommended Dietary Allowances 
(RDA) of protein, calcium, iron, vitamin A and vitamin C to the 
applicable age or grade groups in accordance with the appropriate levels 
provided in paragraphs (b), (c), or (e)(1) of this section, whichever is 
applicable;
    (2) Provision of the breakfast energy allowances for children based 
on the age or grade groups in accordance with the appropriate levels 
provided in paragraphs (b), (c) or (e)(1) of this section, whichever is 
applicable;
    (3) The applicable recommendations of the 1990 Dietary Guidelines 
for Americans which are:
    (i) Eat a variety of foods;
    (ii) Limit total fat to 30 percent of calories;
    (iii) Limit saturated fat to less than 10 percent of calories;
    (iv) Choose a diet low in cholesterol;
    (v) Choose a diet with plenty of vegetables, fruits, and grain 
products; and
    (vi) Use salt and sodium in moderation.
    (4) The following measures of compliance with the applicable 
recommendations of the 1990 Dietary Guidelines for Americans:
    (i) A limit on the percent of calories from total fat to 30 percent 
based on the actual number of calories offered;
    (ii) A limit on the percent of calories from saturated fat to less 
than 10 percent based on the actual number of calories offered;
    (iii) A reduction of the levels of sodium and cholesterol; and
    (iv) An increase in the level of dietary fiber.
    (5) School food authorities have three alternatives for menu 
planning in order

[[Page 96]]

to meet the requirements of this paragraph and the appropriate nutrient 
and calorie levels in paragraphs (b), (c) or (e)(1) of this section, 
whichever is applicable: nutrient standard menu planning as provided in 
paragraph (e) of this section, assisted nutrient standard menu planning 
as provided for in paragraph (f) of this section, or food-based menu 
planning as provided for in paragraph (g) of this section. The actual 
minimum calorie and nutrient levels vary depending upon the alternative 
followed due to the differences in age/grade groupings of each 
alternative.
    (6) Production and menu records shall include sufficient information 
to evaluate the menu's contribution to the requirements on nutrition 
standards in paragraph (a) of this section and the appropriate levels of 
nutrient and calorie levels in paragraphs (b), (c) or (e)(1) of this 
section, whichever is applicable. If applicable, schools or school food 
authorities shall maintain nutritional analysis records to demonstrate 
that breakfasts meet, when averaged over each school week, the nutrition 
standards provided in paragraph (a) of this section and the nutrient and 
calorie levels for children for each age or grade group in accordance 
with paragraphs (b) or (e)(1) of this section.
    (b) Nutrient levels/nutrient analysis. (1) For the purposes of 
nutrient standard and assisted nutrient standard menu planning, as 
provided for in paragraphs (e) and (f), respectively, of this section, 
schools shall, at a minimum, provide the calorie and nutrient levels for 
school breakfasts (offered over a school week) for required grade groups 
specified in the following chart:

                    Minimum Requirements for Nutrient and Calorie Levels for School Breakfast                   
                                             [School week averages]                                             
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                     Option for 
                                                                          Preschool    Grades K-12   grades 7-12
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Energy Allowances (calories)..........................................         388           554           618  
Total Fat (as a Percentage of Actual Total Food Energy)...............       (\1\)         (\1\)         (\1\)  
Total Saturated Fat (as a Percentage of Actual Total Food Energy).....       (\2\)         (\2\)         (\2\)  
Protein (g)...........................................................           5            10            12  
Calcium (mg)..........................................................         200           257           300  
Iron (mg).............................................................           2.5           3.0           3.4
Vitamin A (RE)........................................................         113           197           225  
Vitamin C (mg)........................................................          11            13            14  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Not to exceed 30 percent over a school week.                                                                
\2\ Less than 10 percent over a school week.                                                                    

    (2) At their option, schools may provide for calorie and nutrient 
levels for school breakfasts (offered over a school week) for the age 
groups specified in the following chart or may develop their own age 
groups and their corresponding levels in accordance with paragraph 
(e)(1) of this section.

                    Optional Minimum Nutrient Levels for School Breakfasts/Nutrient Analysis                    
                                             [School week averages]                                             
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                            Ages 3-6      Ages 7-10    Ages 11-13    Ages 14 and
             Nutrients and energy allowances                  years         years         years         above   
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Energy Allowances/Calories..............................        419           500           588           625   
Total Fat (as a percent of actual total food energy)....      (\1\)         (\1\)         (\1\)         (\1\)   
Saturated Fat (as a percent of actual total food energy)      (\2\)         (\2\)         (\2\)         (\2\)   
RDA for Protein (g).....................................          5.50          7.00         11.25         12.50
RDA for Calcium (mg)....................................        200           200           300           300   
RDA for Iron (mg).......................................          2.5           2.5           3.4           3.4 
RDA for Vitamin A (RE)..................................        119           175           225           225   
RDA for Vitamin C (mg)..................................         11.00         11.25         12.50         14.40
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Not to exceed 30 percent over a school week.                                                                
\2\ Less than 10 percent over a school week.                                                                    


[[Page 97]]

    (c) Nutrient levels/food-based menu planning. For the purposes of 
the food-based menu planning alternative as provided for in paragraph 
(g) of this section, the following chart provides the minimum levels, by 
grade group, for calorie and nutrient levels for school breakfasts 
offered over a school week:

                                Calorie and Nutrient Levels for School Breakfast                                
                                             [School week averages]                                             
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                     Option for 
                                                                          Preschool    Grades K-12   grades 7-12
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Energy Allowances (Calories)..........................................         388           554           618  
Total Fat (as a percentage of actual total food energy)...............         \1\           \1\           \1\  
Total Saturated Fat (as a percentage of actual total food energy).....         \2\           \2\           \2\  
Protein (g)...........................................................           5            10            12  
Calcium (mg)..........................................................         200           257           300  
Iron (mg).............................................................           2.5           3.0           3.4
 Vitamin A (RE).......................................................         113           197           225  
Vitamin C (mg)........................................................          11            13            14  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Not to Exceed 30 Percent Over a School Week                                                                 
\2\ Less Than 10 Percent Over a School Week                                                                     

    (d) Exceptions. Breakfasts claimed for reimbursement shall meet the 
nutrition requirements for reimbursable meals specified in this section. 
However, breakfasts served which accommodate the exceptions and 
variations authorized under this paragraph are also reimbursable. 
Exceptions and variations are restricted to the following:
    (1) Medical or dietary needs. Schools shall make substitutions in 
the foods or menu items offered in accordance with this section for 
students who are considered to have a disability under 7 CFR part 15b 
and whose disability restricts their diet. Schools may also make 
substitutions for students who do not have a disability but who are 
unable to consume the regular breakfast because of medical or other 
special dietary needs. Substitutions shall be made on a case-by-case 
basis only when supported by a statement of the need for substitutions 
that includes recommended alternate foods, unless otherwise exempted by 
FCS. Such statement shall, in the case of a disabled student, be signed 
by a physician or, in the case of a student who is not disabled, by a 
recognized medical authority.
    (2) FCS encourages school food authorities to consider ethnic and 
religious preferences when planning and preparing meals. For the 
purposes of the food-based menu planning alternative, FCS may approve 
variations in the food components of the breakfast on an experimental or 
on a continuing basis in any school where there is evidence that such 
variations are nutritionally sound and are necessary to meet ethnic, 
religious, or economic needs.
    (e) Nutrient Standard Menu Planning. (1) Adjusted nutrient levels.  
(i) At a minimum, schools that choose the nutrient standard menu 
planning alternative and that have children age 2 enrolled shall ensure 
that the nutrition standards in paragraph (a) of this section and the 
required preschool levels for nutrients and calories in paragraph (b)(1) 
of this section are met except that, such schools have the option of 
either using the nutrient and calorie levels for preschool children in 
paragraph (b)(2) of this section, or developing separate nutrient levels 
for this age group. The methodology for determining such levels will be 
available in menu planning guidance material provided by FCS.
    (ii) At a minimum, schools shall offer meals to children based on 
the required grade groups in paragraph (b)(1) of this section. However, 
schools may, at their option, offer meals to children using the age 
groups and their corresponding nutrient and calorie levels in paragraph 
(c)(2) of this section or, following guidance provided by FCS, develop 
their own age or grade groups and their corresponding nutrient and 
calorie levels. However, if only one age or grade is outside the 
established levels, schools

[[Page 98]]

may use the levels for the majority of children regardless of the option 
selected.
    (2) Contents of reimbursable meal and offer versus serve. (i)  
Minimum requirements. For the purposes of this menu planning 
alternative, a reimbursable breakfast shall include a minimum of three 
menu items as defined in Sec. 220.2. All menu items or foods offered as 
part of the reimbursable meal may be considered as contributing towards 
meeting the nutrition standards in paragraph (a) of this section and the 
appropriate nutrient and calorie levels in paragraphs (b) or (e)(1) of 
this section, whichever is applicable, except for those foods that are 
considered foods of minimal nutritional value as provided for in 
Sec. 220.2(i-1) which are not offered as part of a menu item in a 
reimbursable meal. Such reimbursable breakfasts, as offered, shall meet 
the established nutrition standards in paragraph (a) of this section and 
the appropriate nutrient and calorie levels in paragraphs (b) or (e)(1) 
of this section, whichever is applicable, when averaged over a school 
week.
    (ii) Offer versus serve. Each participating school shall offer its 
students at least three menu items as required by paragraph (e)(2)(i) of 
this section. Under offer versus serve, students must select at least 
two menu items and may decline a maximum of one menu item offered. The 
price of a reimbursable breakfast shall not be affected if a student 
declines a menu item or requests smaller portions.
    (3) Nutrient analysis under Nutrient Standard Menu Planning. School 
food authorities choosing the nutrient analysis alternative shall 
conduct nutrient analysis on all menu items or foods offered as part of 
the reimbursable meal. However, those foods that are considered as foods 
of minimal nutritional value as provided for in Sec. 220.2(i-1) which 
are not offered as part of a menu item in a reimbursable meal shall not 
be included. Such analysis shall be over the course of each school week.
    (4) The National Nutrient Database and software specifications. (i) 
Nutrient analysis shall be based on information provided in the National 
Nutrient Database for Child Nutrition Programs. This database shall be 
incorporated into software used to conduct nutrient analysis. Upon 
request, FCS will provide information about the database to software 
companies that wish to develop school food service software systems.
    (ii) Any software used to conduct nutrient analysis shall be 
evaluated beforehand by FCS or by an FCS designee and, as submitted, has 
been determined to meet the minimum requirements established by FCS. 
However, such review does not constitute endorsement by FCS or USDA. 
Such software shall provide the capability to perform all functions 
required after the basic data has been entered including calculation of 
weighted averages and the optional combining of analysis of the 
breakfast and lunch programs as provided in paragraph (e)(5) of this 
section.
    (5) Determination of weighted averages. (i) Menu items and foods 
offered as part of a reimbursable meal shall be analyzed based on 
portion sizes and projected serving amounts and shall be weighted based 
on their proportionate contribution to the meals. Therefore, in 
determining whether meals satisfy nutritional requirements, menu items 
or foods more frequently offered will be weighted more heavily than menu 
items or foods which are less frequently offered. Such weighting shall 
be done in accordance with guidance issued by FCS as well as that 
provided by the software used.
    (ii) An analysis of all menu items and foods offered in the menu 
over each school week shall be computed for calories and for each of the 
following nutrients: protein; vitamin A; vitamin C; iron; calcium; total 
fat; saturated fat; and sodium. The analysis shall also include the 
dietary components of cholesterol and dietary fiber.
    (iii) At its option, a school food authority may combine analysis of 
the National School Lunch and School Breakfast Programs. Such analysis 
shall be proportionate to the levels of participation in the two 
programs in accordance with guidance issued by FCS.
    (6) Comparing average nutrient levels. Once the appropriate 
procedures of paragraph (e)(5) of this section have been completed, the 
results shall be compared to the appropriate nutrient

[[Page 99]]

and calorie levels, by age/grade group, in paragraphs (b)(1) or (b)(2) 
of this section or the levels developed in accordance with paragraph 
(e)(1) of this section, whichever is applicable to determine the school 
week's average. In addition, comparisons shall be made to the nutrition 
standards provided in paragraph (a) of this section in order to 
determine the degree of conformity over the school week.
    (7) Adjustments based on students' selections. The results obtained 
under paragraphs (e)(5) and (e)(6) of this section shall be used to 
adjust future menu cycles to accurately reflect production and the 
frequency with which menu items and foods are offered. Menus may require 
further analysis and comparison, depending on the results obtained in 
paragraph (e)(6) of this section when production and selection patterns 
of students change. The school food authority may need to consider 
modifications to the menu items and foods offered based on student 
selections as well as modifications to recipes and other specifications 
to ensure that the nutrition standards provided in paragraph (a) of this 
section and the appropriate calorie and nutrient levels in paragraphs 
(b) or (e)(1) of this section, whichever is applicable, are met.
    (8) Standardized recipes. Under Nutrient Standard Menu Planning, 
standardized recipes shall be developed and followed. A standardized 
recipe is one that was tested to provide an established yield and 
quantity through the use of ingredients that remain constant in both 
measurement and preparation methods. USDA/FCS standardized recipes are 
included in the National Nutrient Database for the Child Nutrition 
Programs. In addition, local standardized recipes used by school food 
authorities shall be analyzed for their calories, nutrients and dietary 
components, as provided for in paragraph (e)(5)(ii) of this section, and 
added to the local databases by school food authorities in accordance 
with guidance issued by FCS.
    (9) Processed foods. Unless already included in the National 
Nutrient Database, the calorie amounts, nutrients and dietary 
components, as provided in paragraph (e)(5)(ii) of this section, of 
purchased processed foods and menu items used by the school food 
authority shall be obtained by the school food authority or State agency 
and incorporated into the database at the local level in accordance with 
FCS guidance.
    (10) Menu substitutions. If the need for serving a substitute 
food(s) or menu item(s) occurs at least two weeks prior to serving the 
planned menu, the revised menu shall be reanalyzed based on the changes. 
If the need for serving a substitute food(s) or menu item(s) occurs two 
weeks or less prior to serving the planned menu, no reanalysis is 
required. However, to the extent possible, substitutions should be made 
using similar foods.
    (11) Compliance with the nutrition standards. If the analysis 
conducted in accordance with paragraphs (e)(1) through (e)(10) of this 
section shows that the menus offered are not meeting the nutrition 
standards in paragraph (a) of this section and the appropriate levels of 
nutrients and calories in paragraphs (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section or 
the levels developed in accordance with paragraph (e)(1), whichever is 
applicable, actions, including technical assistance and training, shall 
be taken by the State agency, school food authority, or school, as 
appropriate, to ensure that the breakfasts offered to children comply 
with the nutrition standards established by paragraph (a) of this 
section and the appropriate levels of nutrients and calories in 
paragraphs (b) or (e)(1) of this section, whichever is applicable.
    (12) Other programs. Any school food authority that operates the 
Summer Food Service Program under part 225 of this chapter and/or the 
Child and Adult Care Food Program under part 226 of this chapter may, at 
its option and with State agency approval, prepare meals provided for 
those programs using the nutrient standard menu planning alternative, 
except for children under two years of age. For school food authorities 
providing meals for adults, FCS will provide guidance on the level of 
nutrients and calories needed.
    (f) Assisted Nutrient Standard Menu Planning. (1) School food 
authorities

[[Page 100]]

without the capability to conduct Nutrient Standard Menu Planning, as 
provided in paragraph (e) of this section may choose an alternative 
which uses menu cycles developed by other sources. Such sources may 
include but are not limited to the State agency, other school food 
authorities, consultants, or food service management companies. This 
alternative is Assisted Nutrient Standard Menu Planning.
    (2) Assisted Nutrient Standard Menu Planning shall establish menu 
cycles that have been developed in accordance with paragraphs (e)(1) 
through (e)(10) of this section as well as local food preferences and 
local food service operations. These menu cycles shall incorporate the 
nutrition standards in paragraph (a) of this section and the appropriate 
nutrient and calorie levels in paragraph (b) or (e)(1) of this section, 
whichever is applicable. In addition to the menu cycle, recipes, food 
product specifications and preparation techniques shall also be 
developed and provided by the entity furnishing Assisted Nutrient 
Standard Menu Planning to ensure that the menu items and foods offered 
conform to the nutrient analysis determinations of the menu cycle.
    (3) At the inception of any use of Assisted Nutrient Standard Menu 
Planning, the State agency shall approve the initial menu cycle, 
recipes, and other specifications to determine that all required 
elements for correct nutrient analysis are incorporated. The State 
agency shall also, upon request of the school food authority, provide 
assistance with implementation of the chosen system.
    (4) After initial service of the menu cycle under the Assisted 
Nutrient Standard Menu Planning, the nutrient analysis shall be 
reassessed and appropriate adjustments made in accordance with paragraph 
(e)(7) of this section.
    (5) Under Assisted Nutrient Standard Menu Planning, the school food 
authority retains final responsibility for ensuring that all nutrition 
standards established in paragraph (a) of this section and the 
appropriate nutrient and calorie levels in paragraphs (b) or (e)(1) of 
this section, whichever is applicable, are met.
    (6) If the analysis conducted in accordance with paragraphs (e)(1) 
through (e)(10) and paragraph (f)(4) of this section shows that the 
menus offered are not meeting the nutrition standards in paragraph (a) 
of this section and the appropriate nutrient and calorie levels in 
paragraph (b) of this section or the levels developed in accordance with 
paragraph (e)(1) of this section, whichever is applicable, actions, 
including technical assistance and training, shall be taken by the State 
agency, school food authority, or school, as appropriate, to ensure that 
the breakfasts offered to children comply with the nutrition standards 
established by paragraph (a) of this section and the appropriate 
nutrient and calorie levels in paragraphs (b) or (e)(1) of this section, 
whichever is applicable.
    (7) Any school food authority that operates the Summer Food Service 
Program under part 225 of this chapter and/or the Child and Adult Care 
Food Program under part 226 of this chapter may, at its option and with 
State agency approval, prepare meals provided for those programs using 
the assisted nutrient standard menu planning alternative, except for 
children under two years of age. For school food authorities providing 
meals for adults, FCS will provide guidance on the level of nutrients 
and calories needed.
    (g) Food-based menu planning. (1) Food components. Except as 
otherwise provided in this paragraph and in any appendix to this part to 
be eligible for Federal cash reimbursement, a breakfast planned using 
the food-based menu planning alternative shall contain, at a minimum, 
the following food components in the quantities specified in the table 
in paragraph (g)(2) of this section:
    (i) A serving of fluid milk served as a beverage or on cereal or 
used in part for each purpose;
    (ii) A serving of fruit or vegetable or both, or full-strength fruit 
or vegetable juice; and
    (iii) Two servings from one of the following components or one 
serving from each:
    (A) Grains/breads;
    (B) Meat/Meat alternate.
    (2) Minimum quantities. At a minimum, schools shall serve meals in 
the quantities provided in the following chart:

[[Page 101]]



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                          Minimum quantities required for                       
                                 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
         Meal component                                                                        Option for grades
                                       Ages 1-2            Preschool          Grades K-12            7-12       
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Milk (Fluid) (As a beverage, on   \1/2\ Cup.........  \3/4\ Cup.........  8 Ounces..........  8 Ounces          
 cereal or both).                                                                                               
                                                                                                                
Juice/Fruit/Vegetable: Fruit and/ \1/4\ Cup.........  \1/2\ Cup.........  \1/2\ Cup.........  \1/2\ Cup         
 or vegetable; or full-strength                                                                                 
 fruit juice or vegetable juice.                                                                                
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
               SELECT ONE SERVING FROM EACH OF THE FOLLOWING COMPONENTS OR TWO FROM ONE COMPONENT:              
                                                                                                                
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Grains/Breads-One of the                                                                                        
 following or an equivalent                                                                                     
 combination:                                                                                                   
    Whole-Grain or Enriched       \1/2\ Slice.......  \1/2\ Slice.......  1 Slice...........  1 Slice.          
     Bread.                                                                                                     
    Whole-Grain or Enriched       \1/2\ Serving.....  \1/2\ Serving.....  1 Serving.........  1 Serving.        
     Biscuit, Roll, Muffin, Etc.                                                                                
    Whole-Grain, Enriched or      \1/4\ Cup or \1/3\  \1/3\ Cup or \1/2\  \3/4\ Cup or 1      \3/4\ Cup or 1    
     Fortified Cereal.             Ounce.              Ounce.              Ounce.              Ounce. Plus an   
                                                                                               Additional       
                                                                                               Serving of one of
                                                                                               the Grains/Breads
                                                                                               Above.           
Meat or Meat Alternates:                                                                                        
    Meat/poultry or fish........  \1/2\ Ounce.......  \1/2\ Ounce.......  1 Ounce...........  1 Ounce.          
    Cheese......................  \1/2\ Ounce.......  \1/2\ Ounce.......  1 Ounce...........  1 Ounce.          
    Egg (large).................  \1/2\.............  \1/2\.............  \1/2\.............  \1/2\.            
    Peanut butter or other nut    1 Tablespoon......  1 Tablespoon......  2 Tablespoons.....  2 Tablespoons.    
     or seed butters.                                                                                           
    Cooked dry beans and peas...  2 Tablespoons.....  2 Tablespoons.....  4 Tablespoons.....  4 Tablespoons     
    Nut and/or seeds (as listed   \1/2\ Ounce.......  \1/2\ Ounce.......  1 Ounce...........  1 Ounce.          
     in program guidance) \1\.                                                                                  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ No more than 1 ounce of nuts and/or seeds may be served in any one meal.                                    

    (3) Offer Versus Serve. Each school shall offer its students all 
four required food items as set forth under paragraph (g)(1) of this 
section. At the option of the school food authority, each school may 
allow students to refuse one food item from any component that the 
student does not intend to consume. The refused food item may be any of 
the four items offered to the student. A student's decision to accept 
all four food items or to decline one of the four food items shall not 
affect the charge for breakfast.
    (4) Outlying areas. Schools in American Samoa, Puerto Rico and the 
Virgin Islands may serve a starchy vegetable such as yams, plantains, or 
sweet potatoes to meet the grain/bread requirement. For the Commonwealth 
of the Northern Mariana Islands, FCS has established a menu consistent 
with the food-based menu alternative and with local food consumption 
patterns and which, given available food supplies and food service 
equipment and facilities, provides optimum nutrition consistent with 
sound dietary habits for participating children. The State agency shall 
attach to and make a part of the written agreement required under 
Sec. 210.9 of this chapter the requirements of that menu option.
    (h) Milk requirement for children ages 2-17. (1) A serving of milk 
as a beverage or on cereal or used in part for each purpose shall be 
offered for school breakfasts.
    (2) If emergency conditions prevent a school normally having a 
supply of milk from temporarily obtaining delivery thereof, the State 
agency, or FCSRO where applicable, may approve reimbursement for 
breakfast served without milk during the emergency period.
    (3) If a school is unable to obtain a supply of any type of fluid 
milk on a continuing basis, the State agency may approve the service of 
breakfasts without milk if the school uses an equivalent amount of 
canned or dry milk in the preparation of breakfasts. In Alaska, Hawaii, 
American Samoa, Guam, Puerto Rico, the Commonwealth of the Northern 
Mariana Islands, and the Virgin Islands, if a sufficient supply of fluid 
milk cannot be obtained, ``milk'' shall include reconstituted or 
recombined milk, or as otherwise provided under written exception by 
FCS.

[[Page 102]]

    (i) Infant meal pattern. When infants from birth through 11 months 
of age participate in the Program, an infant breakfast shall be offered. 
Foods within the infant breakfast pattern shall be of texture and 
consistency appropriate for the particular age group being served, and 
shall be served to the infant during a span of time consistent with the 
infant's eating habits. For infants 4 through 7 months of age, solid 
foods are optional and should be introduced only when the infant is 
developmentally ready. Whenever possible, the school should consult with 
the infant's parent in making the decision to introduce solid foods. 
Solid foods should be introduced one at a time on a gradual basis with 
the intent of ensuring health and nutritional well-being. For infants 8 
through 11 months of age, the total amount of food authorized in the 
meal patterns set forth below must be provided in order to qualify for 
reimbursement. Additional foods may be served to infants 4 months of age 
and older with the intent of improving their overall nutrition. Breast 
milk, provided by the infant's mother, may be served in place of infant 
formula from birth through 11 months of age. However, meals containing 
only breast milk do not qualify for reimbursement. Meals containing 
breast milk served to infants 4 months or older may be claimed for 
reimbursement when the other meal component or components are supplied 
by the school. Although it is recommended that either breast milk or 
iron-fortified infant formula be served for the entire first year, whole 
milk may be served beginning at 8 months of age as long as infants are 
consuming one-third of their calories as a balanced mixture of cereal, 
fruits, vegetables, and other foods in order to ensure adequate sources 
of iron and vitamin C. The infant breakfast pattern shall contain, at a 
minimum, each of the following components in the amounts indicated for 
the appropriate age groups:
    (1) Birth through 3 months. 4 to 6 fluid ounces of iron-fortified 
infant formula.
    (2) 4 through 7 months. 4 to 8 fluid ounces of iron-fortified infant 
formula; and 0 to 3 tablespoons of iron-fortified dry infant cereal 
(optional).
    (3) 8 through 11 months. 6 to 8 fluid ounces of iron-fortified 
infant formula or 6 to 8 fluid ounces of whole milk; 2 to 4 tablespoons 
of iron-fortified dry infant cereal; and 1 to 4 tablespoons of fruit or 
vegetable of appropriate consistency or a combination of both.
    (j) Additional foods. Additional foods may be served with breakfasts 
as desired to participating children over 1 year of age.
    (k) Choice. To provide variety and to encourage consumption and 
participation, schools should, whenever possible, provide a selection of 
menu items and foods from which children may make choices. When a school 
offers a selection of more than one type of breakfast or when it offers 
a variety of menu items and foods and milk for choice as a reimbursable 
breakfast, the school shall offer all children the same selection 
regardless of whether the children are eligible for free or reduced 
price breakfasts or pay the school food authority designated full price. 
The school may establish different unit prices for each type of 
breakfast offered provided that the benefits made available to children 
eligible for free or reduced price breakfasts are not affected.
    (l) Nutrition disclosure. School food authorities are encouraged to 
make information available indicating efforts to meet the nutrition 
standards in paragraph (a) of this section.
    (m) Implementation of nutrition standards. School food authorities 
shall comply with the 1990 Dietary Guidelines for Americans as provided 
in paragraph (a) of this section no later than School Year 1996-97 
except that State agencies may grant waivers to postpone implementation 
until no later than School Year 1998-99. Such waivers shall be granted 
by the State agency using guidance provided by the Secretary.

[60 FR 31217, June 13, 1995, 60 FR 57147, Nov. 14, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 220.8a   Breakfast components and quantities for the meal pattern.

    (a)(1) Food components--Except as otherwise provided in this section 
and in any appendix to this part, a breakfast eligible for Federal cash 
reimbursement shall contain, at a minimum, the following food components 
in

[[Page 103]]

the quantities specified in the table in paragraph (a)(2) of this 
section:
    (i) A serving of fluid milk served as a beverage or on cereal or 
used in part for each purpose;
    (ii) A serving of fruit or vegetable or both, or full-strength fruit 
or vegetable juice; and
    (iii) Two servings from one of the following components or one 
serving from each:
    (A) Bread/Bread alternate
    (B) Meat/Meat alternate
    (2) Minimum required breakfast quantities. Except as otherwise 
provided in this section and in any appendix to this part, a breakfast 
eligible for Federal cash reimbursement shall contain at least the per 
breakfast minimum quantities of each item for the age and grade levels 
specified in the following table:

                                            School Breakfast Pattern                                            
                                        [Required minimum serving sizes]                                        
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
       Food components/items               Ages 1 and 2            Ages 3, 4, and 5             Grades K-12     
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Milk (Fluid):                                                                                                   
    (As a beverage, on cereal, or    \1/2\ cup..............  \3/4\ cup.................  \1/2\ pint.           
     both).                                                                                                     
JUICE/FRUIT/VEGETABLE:\1\                                                                                       
    Fruit and/or vegetable; or Full- \1/4\ cup..............  \1/2\ cup.................  \1/2\ cup.            
     strength: Fruit Juice or                                                                                   
     Vegetable Juice.                                                                                           
Bread/Bread Alternates:\2\                                                                                      
    --Bread (whole-grain or          \1/2\ slice............  \1/2\ slice...............  1 slice.              
     enriched).                                                                                                 
    --Biscuit, rolll, muffin or      \1/2\ serving..........  \1/2\ serving.............  1 serving.            
     equal serving of cornbread,                                                                                
     etc. (whole-grain or enriched                                                                              
     meal or flour.                                                                                             
    --Cereal (whole-grain or         \1/4\ cup or \1/3\ oz..  \1/3\ cup or \1/2\ oz.....  \3/4\ cup or 1 oz.    
     enriched or fortified).                                                                                    
Meat/Meat Alternates:                                                                                           
    --Meat/poultry, or fish........  \1/2\ oz...............  \1/2\ oz..................  1 oz.                 
    --Cheese.......................  \1/2\ oz...............  \1/2\ oz..................  1 oz.                 
    --Egg (large)..................  \1/2\..................  1/2.......................  \1/2\.                
    --Peanut Butter of other nut or  1 Tbsp.................  1 Tbsp....................  2 Tbsp.               
     seed butters.                                                                                              
    --Cooked dry beans and peas....  2 Tbsp.................  2 Tbsp....................  4 Tbsp.               
    --Nuts and/or Seeds (as listed   \1/2\ oz...............  \1/2\ oz..................  1 oz.                 
     in program guidance)\3\.                                                                                   
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ A citrus juice or fruit or a fruit or vegetable or juice that is a good source of vitamin C (See Menu       
  Planning Guide for School Food Service--PA-1260) is recommended to be offered daily.                          
\2\ See Food Buying Guide for Child Nutrition Programs, PA-1331 (1984) for serving sizes for breads and bread   
  alternates.                                                                                                   
\3\ No more than one ounce of nuts and/or seeds may be served in any one meal.                                  

    (3) Offer Versus Serve. Each school shall offer its students all 
four required food items as set forth under paragraph (a)(1) of this 
section. At the option of the school food authority, each school may 
allow students to refuse one food item from any component that the 
student does not intend to consume. The refused food item may be any of 
the four items offered to the student. A student's decision to accept 
all four food items or to decline one of the four food items shall not 
affect the charge for breakfast.
    (b) Infant meal pattern. When infants from birth through 11 months 
of age participate in the Program, an infant breakfast shall be offered. 
Foods within the infant breakfast pattern shall be of texture and 
consistency appropriate for the particular age group being served, and 
shall be served to the infant during a span of time consistent with the 
infant's eating habits. For infants 4 through 7 months of age, solid 
foods are optional and should be introduced only when the infant is 
developmentally ready. Whenever possible, the school should consult with 
the infant's parent in making the decision to introduce solid foods. 
Solid foods should be introduced one at a time on a gradual basis with 
the intent of ensuring health and nutritional well-being. For infants 8 
through 11 months of age, the total amount of food authorized in the 
meal patterns set forth below must be provided in order to qualify for 
reimbursement. Additional foods may be served to infants 4 months of age 
and older with the intent of improving their overall nutrition. Breast 
milk, provided by the infant's mother, may be served in place of infant 
formula from birth through 11 months of age. However, meals containing 
only breast milk do not qualify for reimbursement. Meals containing 
breast milk served to infants 4 months or older may be claimed for 
reimbursement when the

[[Page 104]]

other meal component or components are supplied by the school. Although 
it is recommended that either breast milk or iron-fortified infant 
formula be served for the entire first year, whole milk may be served 
beginning at 8 months of age as long as infants are consuming one-third 
of their calories as a balanced mixture of cereal, fruits, vegetables, 
and other foods in order to ensure adequate sources of iron and vitamin 
C. The infant breakfast pattern shall contain, as a minimum, each of the 
following components in the amounts indicated for the appropriate age 
groups:
    (1) Birth through 3 months. 4 to 6 fluid ounces of iron-fortified 
infant formula.
    (2) 4 through 7 months. 4 to 8 fluid ounces of iron-fortified infant 
formula; and 0 to 3 tablespoons of iron-fortified dry infant cereal 
(optional).
    (3) 8 through 11 months. 6 to 8 fluid ounces of iron-fortified 
infant formula or 6 to 8 fluid ounces of whole milk; 2 to 4 tablespoons 
of iron-fortified dry infant cereal; and 1 to 4 tablespoons of fruit or 
vegetable of appropriate consistency or a combination of both.
    (c) Additional foods may be served with breakfasts as desired to 
participating children over 1 year of age.
    (d) If emergency conditions prevent a school normally having a 
supply of milk from temporarily obtaining delivery thereof, the State 
agency, or FCSRO where applicable, may approve reimbursement for 
breakfast served without milk during the emergency period.
    (e) FCS may approve variations in the food components of the 
breakfast on an experimental or on a continuing basis in any school 
where there is evidence that such variations are nutritionally sound and 
are necessary to meet ethnic, religious, economic or physical needs.
    (f) Schools shall make substitutions in foods listed in this section 
for students who are considered handicapped under 7 CFR part 15b and 
whose handicap restricts their diet. Schools may also make substitutions 
for nonhandicapped students who are unable to consume the regular 
breakfast because of medical or other special dietary needs. 
Substitutions shall be made on a case-by-case basis only when supported 
by a statement of the need for substitutions that includes recommended 
alternate foods, unless otherwise exempted by FCS. Such statement shall, 
in the case of a handicapped student, be signed by a physician or, in 
the case of a nonhandicapped student, by a recognized medical authority.
    (g) The inability of a school to obtain a supply of milk on a 
continuing basis to meet the breakfast requirements in paragraphs (a) 
and (b) of this section shall not bar it from participation in the 
Program. In such cases the State agency, or FCSRO were applicable, may 
approve the service of breakfasts without milk: Provided, however, That 
an equivalent amount of canned, whole dry, or nonfat dry milk is used in 
the preparation of the components of the breakfast patterns listed in 
paragraphs (a)(1) and (b)(3) of this section.
    (h) For the period ending September 30, 1977, the Secretary, with 
the concurrence of officials of the Trust Territory of the Pacific 
Islands, shall establish a breakfast pattern or patterns which are 
consonant with local food consumption patterns and which, given 
available food supplies and food service equipment and facilities, 
provide optimum nutrition consistent with sound dietary habits for 
participating children, for use in the Trust Territory in lieu of the 
breakfast patterns listed in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section. The 
requirements for such patterns shall be attached to and made a part of 
the written agreement required under Sec. 220.3 of this part.

(44 U.S.C. 3506)

[Amdt. 25, 41 FR 34759, Aug. 17, 1976, as amended by Amdt. 26, 41 FR 
52057, Nov. 26, 1976; 47 FR 746, Jan. 7, 1982; 53 FR 25308, July 6, 
1988, 53 FR 48632; Amdt. 56, 54 FR 2990, Jan. 23, 1989; Amdt. 57, 54 FR 
13047, Mar. 30, 1989, 54 FR 13605, Apr. 4, 1989. Redesignated at 60 FR 
31217, June 13, 1995; amended at 60 FR 31222, June 13, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 220.9   Reimbursement payments.

    (a) State agencies, or FCSRO's where applicable, shall make 
reimbursement payments to schools only in connection with breakfasts 
meeting the requirements of Sec. 220.8 or Sec. 220.8a, whichever is 
applicable, and reported in accordance with Sec. 220.11(b) of this part. 
School Food Authorities shall plan for and

[[Page 105]]

prepare breakfasts on the basis of participation trends, with the 
objective of providing one breakfast per child per day. Production and 
participation records shall be maintained to demonstrate positive action 
toward this objective. In recognition of the fluctuation in 
participation levels which makes it difficult to precisely estimate the 
number of breakfasts needed and to reduce the resultant waste, any 
excess breakfasts that are prepared may be served to eligible children 
and may be claimed for reimbursement unless the State agency, or FCSRO 
where applicable, determines that the School Food Authority has failed 
to plan and prepare breakfasts with the objective of providing one 
breakfast per child per day. In no event shall the School Food Authority 
claim reimbursement for free and reduced price breakfasts in excess of 
the number of children approved for free and reduced price meals.
    (b) The rates of reimbursement for breakfasts served to eligible 
children in schools not in severe need are the applicable national 
average payment factors for breakfasts. The maximum rates of 
reimbursement for breakfasts served to eligible children in schools 
determined to be in severe need are those prescribed by the Secretary. 
National average payment factors and maximum rates of reimbursement for 
the School Breakfast Program shall be prescribed annually by the 
Secretary in the Federal Register.
    (c) The total reimbursement for breakfasts served to eligible 
children in, (1) schools not in severe need, and (2) severe need schools 
in State's with State Breakfast mandates as provided for in 
Sec. 220.9(e)(3) (i) and (ii) in any School Food Authority during the 
school year shall not exceed the sum of the products obtained by 
multiplying the total numbers of such free, reduced price and paid 
breakfasts, respectively, by the applicable rate of reimbursement for 
each type of breakfast as prescribed for the school year.
    (d) For any school year, severe need reimbursement payments to any 
School Food Authority except as provided for in paragraph (c) of this 
section shall be the lesser of: (1) The cost of providing free and 
reduced price breakfast to eligible children in schools determined to be 
in severe need, less the reduced price payments received by such 
schools; or (2) the number of free and the number of reduced price 
breakfasts, respectively, that are served to eligible children in 
schools determined to be in severe need, multiplied by the applicable 
severe need reimbursement rates for such breakfasts.
    (e) Severe need schools. The State agency, or FCSRO where 
applicable, shall determine whether a school is in severe need based on 
the following eligibility criteria: (1) The reimbursement rate per meal 
established by the Secretary is insufficient to cover the costs of the 
school's breakfast program; (2) the school is participating in or 
desiring to initiate a breakfast program; and (3) 40 percent or more of 
the lunches served to students at the school in the second preceding 
school year were served free or at a reduced price. In addition, schools 
which are required by State law to serve breakfasts and which fail to 
satisfy the required 40 percent eligibility criteria are eligible for 
severe need reimbursement rates only for the following limited time 
periods:
    (i) In States where the State legislature meets annually, the 
schools may receive severe need reimbursement rates until July 1, 1983; 
and (ii) in States where the State legislature meets biennially, the 
schools may receive severe need reimbursement rates until July 1, 1984. 
State agencies shall maintain on file, and have available for review and 
audits, their eligibility criteria for determining the severe need of 
schools and the source of the data to be used in making individual 
determinations. The State agency, or FCSRO where applicable, shall be 
responsible for establishing systems for determining breakfast costs 
where

[[Page 106]]

such costs are necessary to the determination of whether or not a school 
is in severe need.

(Sec. 6, Pub. L. 95-627, 92 Stat. 3620 (42 U.S.C. 1776; secs. 801, 803, 
812; Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 521-535, 42 U.S.C. 1753, 1759(a), 1758, 
1773; sec. 819, Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 533 (42 U.S.C. 1759a, 1773 and 
1757); 44 U.S.C. 3506))

[Amdt. 25, 41 FR 34760, Aug. 17, 1976, as amended by Amdt. 29, 44 FR 
48159, Aug. 17, 1979; Amdt. No. 38, 46 FR 50928, Oct. 16, 1981; 46 FR 
51368, Oct. 20, 1981; 47 FR 746, Jan. 7, 1982; 47 FR 31375, July 20, 
1982; 48 FR 40196, 40197, Sept. 6, 1983; 60 FR 31222, June 13, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 220.10   Effective date for reimbursement.

    Reimbursement payments under the School Breakfast Program may be 
made only to School Food Authorities operating under an agreement with 
the State Agency or the Department, and may be made only after execution 
of the agreement. Such payments may include reimbursement in connection 
with breakfasts served in accordance with provisions of the program in 
the calendar month preceding the calendar month in which the agreement 
is executed.

[32 FR 35, Jan. 5, 1967, as amended by Amdt. 9, 37 FR 9613, May 13, 
1972]


<R05>
Sec. 220.11  Reimbursement procedures.

    (a) To be entitled to reimbursement under this part, each School 
Food Authority shall submit to the State agency, or FCSRO where 
applicable, a monthly Claim for Reimbursement.
    (b) Claims for Reimbursement shall include data in sufficient detail 
to justify the reimbursement claimed and to enable the State agency to 
provide the Reports of School Program Operations required under 
Sec. 220.13(b)(2). Unless otherwise approved by FCS, the Claim for 
Reimbursement for any month shall include only breakfasts served in that 
month except if the first or last month of Program operations for any 
year contains 10 operating days or less, such month may be added to the 
Claim for Reimbursement for the appropriate adjacent month; however, 
Claims for Reimbursement may not combine operations occurring in two 
fiscal years. A final Claim for Reimbursement shall be postmarked and/or 
submitted to the State agency, or FCSRO where applicable, not later than 
60 days following the last day of the full month covered by the claim. 
State agencies may establish shorter deadlines at their discretion. 
Claims not postmarked and/or submitted within 60 days shall not be paid 
with Program funds unless FCS determines that an exception should be 
granted. The State agency, or FCSRO where applicable, shall promptly 
take corrective action with respect to any Claim for Reimbursement as 
determined necessary through its claim review process or otherwise. In 
taking such corrective action, State agencies may make upward 
adjustments in Program funds claimed on claims filed within the 60 day 
deadline if such adjustments are completed within 90 days of the last 
day of the claim month and are reflected in the final Report of School 
Program Operations (FCS-10) for the claim month which is required under 
Sec. 220.13(b)(2). Upward adjustments in Program funds claimed which are 
not reflected in the final FCS-10 for the claim month shall not be made 
unless authorized by FCS. Downward adjustments in Program funds claimed 
shall always be made, without FCS authorization, regardless of when it 
is determined that such adjustments are necessary.
    (c) Where a school participates in both the National School Lunch 
Program and the School Breakfast Program, the State agency or FCSRO, 
where applicable, may authorize the submission of one claim for 
reimbursement to cover both programs.
    (d) [Reserved]
    (e) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the State 
agency, or FCSRO where applicable, may advance funds available for the 
School Breakfast Program to a School Food Authority in an amount equal 
to the reimbursement estimated for the total number of breakfasts, 
including free and reduced price breakfasts, to be served to children 
for 1 month. The State agency, or FCSRO where applicable, shall require 
School Food Authorities who receive advances of funds under the 
provisions of this paragraph to make timely submissions of claims for 
reimbursement on a monthly basis and shall suspend advances of funds in

[[Page 107]]

the absence of such timely submissions. Following the receipt of claims 
the State agency, or FCSRO where applicable, shall make such adjustments 
as are necessary in such advances of funds to insure that the total 
amount of reimbursement received by a School Food Authority for the 
fiscal year will not exceed an amount equal to the number of breakfasts, 
including free and reduced price breakfast, served to children times the 
respective rates of reimbursement assigned by the State agency, or FCSRO 
where applicable, in accordance with Sec. 220.9.

(Title 1, Chapter I, Pub. L. 96-38, 93 Stat. 98 (42 U.S.C. 1776a); secs. 
807 and 808, Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 521-535, 42 U.S.C. 1772, 1784, 
1760; sec. 819, Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 533 (42 U.S.C. 1759a, 1773, 
1757); Pub. L. 97-370, 96 Stat. 1806)

[32 FR 35, Jan. 5, 1967, as amended by Amdt. 9, 37 FR 9613, May 13, 
1972; 40 FR 30924, July 24, 1975; 45 FR 82622, Dec. 16, 1980; 47 FR 
31376, July 20, 1982; 48 FR 40196, Sept. 6, 1983; Amdt. 49, 49 FR 18987, 
May 4, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 220.12  Competitive food services.

    (a) State agencies and School Food Authorities shall establish such 
rules or regulations as are necessary to control the sale of foods in 
competition with breakfasts served under the Program. Such rules or 
regulations shall prohibit the sale of foods of minimal nutritional 
value, as listed in appendix B of this part, in the food service areas 
during the breakfast periods. The sale of other competitive foods may, 
at the discretion of the State agency and the School Food Authority, be 
allowed in the food service area during the breakfast period only if all 
income from the sale of such foods accrues to the benefit of the 
nonprofit school food service or the school or student organizations 
approved by the school. State agencies and School Food Authorities may 
impose additional restrictions on the sale of and income from all foods 
sold at any time throughout schools participating in the School 
Breakfast Program.
    (b)(1) Any person may submit a petition to FCS requesting that an 
individual food be exempted from a category of foods of minimal 
nutritional value listed in appendix B. In the case of artificially 
sweetened foods, the petition must include a statement of the percent of 
RDI for the eight nutrients listed in Sec. 220.2(i-1) that the food 
provides per serving and the petitioner's source of this information. In 
the case of all other foods, the petition must include a statement of 
the percent of RDI for the eight nutrients listed in Sec. 220.2(i-1) 
that the food provides per serving and per 100 calories and the 
petitioner's source of this information. The Department will determine 
whether or not the individual food is a food of minimal nutritional 
value as defined Sec. 220.2(i-1), and will inform the petitioner in 
writing of such determination, and the public by notice in the Federal 
Register as indicated under paragraph (b)(3) of this section. In 
determining whether an individual food is a food of minimal nutritional 
value, discrete nutrients added to the food will not be taken into 
account.
    (2) Any person may submit a petition to FCS requesting that foods in 
a particular category of foods be classified as foods of minimal 
nutritional value as defined in Sec. 220.2(i-1). The petition must 
identify and define the food category in easily understood language, 
list examples of the foods contained in the category and include a list 
which the foods in that category usually contain. If, upon review of the 
petition, the Department determines that the foods in that category 
should not be classified as foods of minimal nutritional value, the 
petitioner will be so notified in writing. If upon review of the 
petition, the Department determines that there is a substantial 
likelihood that the foods in that category should be classified as foods 
of minimal nutritional value as defined in Sec. 220.2(i-1), the 
Department shall at that time inform the petitioner. In addition, the 
Department shall publish a proposed rule restricting the sale of the 
foods in that category, setting forth the reasons for this action, and 
soliciting public comments. On the basis of comments received within 60 
days of publication of the proposed rule and other available 
information, the Department will determine whether the nutrient 
composition of the foods indicates that the category should be 
classified as a category of foods of minimal nutritional value.


[[Page 108]]


The petitioner shall be notified in writing and the public shall be 
notified of the Department's final determination upon publication in the 
Federal Register as indicated under section (b)(3) of this section.
    (3) By May 1 and November 1 of each year, the Department shall amend 
appendix B to exclude those individual foods identified under paragraph 
(b)(1) of this section, and to include those categories of foods 
identified under paragraph (b)(2) of this section, Provided That there 
are necessary changes.

(Sec. 819, Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 533 (42 U.S.C. 1759a, 1773 and 1757))

[Amdt. 32, 45 FR 6771, Jan. 29, 1980, as amended by Amdt. 34, 45 FR 
76937, Nov. 21, 1980; 50 FR 20547, May 17, 1985; 59 FR 23614, May 6, 
1994]


<R05>
Sec. 220.13   Special responsibilities of State agencies.

    (a) [Reserved]
    (a-1) Each State agency, or FCSRO where applicable, shall require 
each School Food Authority of a school participating in the School 
Breakfast Program to develop and file for approval a free and reduced 
price policy statement in accordance with paragraph (a) of Sec. 220.7.
    (b) Records and reports. (1) Each State agency shall maintain 
Program records as necessary to support the reimbursement payments made 
to School Food Authorities under Sec. 220.9 and the reports submitted to 
FCS under Sec. 220.13(b)(2). The records may be kept in their original 
form or on microfilm, and shall be retained for a period of three years 
after the date of submission of the final Financial Status Report for 
the fiscal year, except that if audit findings have not been resolved, 
the records shall be retained beyond the three-year period as long as 
required for the resolution of the issues raised by the audit.
    (2) Each State agency shall submit to FCS a final Report of School 
Program Operations (FCS-10) for each month which shall be limited to 
claims submitted in accordance with Sec. 220.11(b) and which shall be 
postmarked and/or submitted no later than 90 days following the last day 
of the month covered by the report. States shall not receive Program 
funds for any month for which the final report is not submitted within 
this time limit unless FCS grants an exception. Upward adjustments to a 
State agency's report shall not be made after 90 days from the month 
covered by the report unless authorized by FCS. Downward adjustments 
shall always be made, without FCS authorization, regardless of when it 
is determined that such adjustments are necessary. Adjustments shall be 
reported to FCS in accordance with procedures established by FCS. Each 
State agency shall also submit to FCS a quarterly Financial Status 
Report (SF-269) on the use of Program funds. Such reports shall be 
postmarked and/or submitted no later than 30 days after the end of each 
fiscal year quarter. Obligations shall be reported only for the fiscal 
year in which they occur. A final Financial Status Report for each 
fiscal year shall be postmarked and/or submitted to FCS within 120 days 
after the end of the fiscal year. FCS shall not be responsible for 
reimbursing unpaid Program obligations reported later than 120 days 
after the close of the fiscal year in which they were incurred.
    (c) Each State agency shall promptly investigate complaints received 
or irregularities noted in connection with the operation of either 
program, and shall take appropriate action to correct any 
irregularities. State Agencies shall maintain on file evidence of such 
investigations and actions. FCS or OI shall make investigations at the 
request of the State Agency or where FCS or OI determines investigations 
are appropriate.
    (d) The State agency shall release to FCS any Federal funds made 
available to it under the Act which are unobligated at the end of each 
fiscal year. Any such funds shall remain available to FCS for the 
purposes of the programs authorized by the Act until expended. Release 
of funds by the State Agency shall be made as soon as practicable, but 
in any event not later than 30 days following demand by FCSRO and shall 
be reflected by related adjustment in the State Agency's Letter of 
Credit.
    (e) State agencies shall provide School Food Authorities with 
monthly

[[Page 109]]

information on foods available in plentiful supply, based on information 
provided by the Department.
    (f) Each State agency shall provide program assistance as follows:
    (1) Each State agency or FCSRO where applicable shall provide 
consultative, technical, and managerial personnel to administer 
programs, monitor performance, and measure progress toward achieving 
program goals.
    (2) State agencies shall conduct reviews of schools participating in 
the Program for compliance with the provisions of this part when such 
schools are being reviewed under the provisions identified under 
Sec. 210.18(i) of this title. Compliance reviews of participating 
schools shall focus on the reviewed school's compliance with the 
required certification, counting and breakfast service procedures. 
School food authorities may appeal a denial of all or a part of the 
Claim for Reimbursement or withholding of payment arising from review 
activity conducted by the State agency under Sec. 210.18 of this title 
or by FCS under Sec. 210.30(d)(2) of this title. Any such appeal shall 
be subject to the procedures set forth under Sec. 210.18(q) of this 
title or Sec. 210.30(d)(3) of this title, as appropriate.
    (3) For the purposes of compliance with the 1990 Dietary Guidelines 
for Americans and the calorie and nutrient levels specified in 
Sec. 220.8, the State agency shall follow the provisions specified in 
Sec. 210.19(a)(1) of this chapter.
    (4) Such assistance shall include visits to participating schools to 
ensure compliance with program regulations and with the Department's 
nondiscrimination regulations (part 15 of this title), issued under 
title VI, of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
    (5) Documentation of such assistance shall be maintained on file by 
the State agency, or FCSRO where applicable.
    (g) State agencies shall adequately safeguard all assets and assure 
that they are used solely for authorized purposes.
    (h) [Reserved]
    (i) Each State agency, or FCS where applicable, shall establish a 
financial management system under which School Food Authorities shall 
account for all revenues and expenditures of their nonprofit school food 
service. The system shall prescribe the allowability of nonprofit school 
food service expenditures in accordance with this part and, as 
applicable, the cost principles contained in OMB Circular A-87 and 7 CFR 
part 3015. The system shall permit determination of school food service 
net cash resources, and shall include any criteria for approval of net 
cash resources in excess of three months average expenditures. In 
addition, School Food Authorities shall be required to account 
separately for other food services which are operated by the School Food 
Authority.
    (j) During audits, supervisory assistance reviews, or by other 
means, State agencies, or FCSROs where applicable, shall be responsible 
for monitoring the net cash resources of the nonprofit school food 
service of each School Food Authority participating in the Program. In 
the event that such resources exceed three months average expenditures 
for the School Food Authority's nonprofit school food service, or such 
amount as may be approved by the State agency or FCSRO where applicable, 
the State agency or FCSRO where applicable, may require the School Food 
Authority to reduce children's prices, improve food quality or take 
other actions designed to improve the nonprofit school food service. In 
the absence of any such action, adjustments in the rates of 
reimbursement under the Program shall be made.
    (k) State agencies shall require compliance by School Food 
Authorities with applicable provisions of this part.
    (l) Each State agency, or FCSRO where applicable, shall:
    (1) Provide information to school boards and public officials 
concerning the benefits and availability of the program; and
    (2) Select each year, for additional informational efforts 
concerning the program, nonparticipating schools in

[[Page 110]]

which a substantial portion of the enrollment is eligible for free or 
reduced-price meals.

(44 U.S.C. 3506; sec. 812, Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 521-535 (42 U.S.C. 
1759a); sec. 819, Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 533 (42 U.S.C. 1759a, 1773 and 
1757); Pub. L. 79-396, 60 Stat. 231 (42 U.S.C. 1751); Pub. L. 89-642, 80 
Stat 885-890 (42 U.S.C. 1773); Pub. L. 91-248, 84 Stat. 207 (42 U.S.C. 
1759))

[32 FR 37, Jan. 5, 1967. Redesignated by Amdt. 2, 33 FR 14513, Sept. 27, 
1968]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting 
Sec. 220.13, see the List of CFR Sections Affected in the Finding Aids 
section of this volume.


<R05>
Sec. 220.14   Claims against school food authorities.

    (a) State agencies shall disallow any portion of a claim and recover 
any payment made to a School Food Authority that was not properly 
payable under this part. State agencies will use their own procedures to 
disallow claims and recover overpayments already made.
    (b) [Reserved]
    (c) The State agency may refer to CND through the FCSRO for 
determination any action it proposes to take under this section.
    (d) The State agency shall maintain all records pertaining to action 
taken under this section. Such records shall be retained for a period of 
3 years after the end of the fiscal year to which they pertain.
    (e) If CND does not concur with the State agency's action in paying 
a claim or a reclaim, or in failing to collect an overpayment, CND shall 
assert a claim against the State agency for the amount of such claim, 
reclaim, or overpayment. In all such cases the State agency shall have 
full opportunity to submit to CND evidence or information concerning the 
action taken. If, in the determination of CND, the State agency's action 
was unwarranted, the State agency shall promptly pay to FCS the amount 
of the claim, reclaim, or overpayment.
    (f) The amounts recovered by the State agency from Schools may be 
utilized, first, to make payments to School Food Authorities for the 
purposes of the related program during the fiscal year for which the 
funds were initially available, and second to repay any State funds 
expended in the reimbursement of claims under the program and not 
otherwise repaid. Any amounts recovered which are not so utilized shall 
be returned to FCS in accordance with the requirements of this part.
    (g) With respect to School Food Authorities of schools in which the 
program is administered by FCSRO, when FCSRO disallows a claim or a 
portion of a claim, or makes a demand for refund of an alleged 
overpayment, it shall notify the School Food Authority of the reasons 
for such disallowance or demand and the School Food Authority shall have 
full opportunity to submit evidence or to file reclaims for any amounts 
disallowed or demanded in the same manner as that afforded in this 
section to School Food Authorities of schools in which the program is 
administered by State agencies.
    (h) In the event that the State agency or FCSRO, where applicable, 
finds that a school is failing to meet the requirements of 
Sec. 220.8(g), Sec. 220.8(i)(2) and (i)(3) or 220.8a(a)(1), (b)(2), and 
(b)(3), whichever is applicable, the State agency or FCSRO need not 
disallow payment or collect an overpayment arising out of such failure, 
if the State agency or FCSRO takes such other action as, in its opinion, 
will have a corrective effect.
    (i) The Secretary shall have the authority to determine the amount 
of, to settle, and to adjust any claim arising under the Program, and to 
compromise or deny such claim or any part thereof. The Secretary shall 
also have the authority to waive such claims if the Secretary determines 
that to do so would serve the purposes of the Program. This provision 
shall not diminish the authority of the Attorney General of the United 
States under section 516 of Title 28, U.S. Code, to conduct litigation 
on behalf of the United States.

(44 U.S.C. 3506; secs. 804, 816 and 817, Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 521-535 
(42 U.S.C. 1753, 1756, 1759, 1771 and 1785))

[32 FR 37, Jan. 5, 1967. Redesignated by Amdt. 2, 33 FR 14513, Sept. 27, 
1968, and amended by Amdt. 9, 37 FR 9614, May 13, 1972; 40 FR 30925, 
July 24, 1975. Redesignated and amended by Amdt. 25, 41 FR 34757, 34760, 
Aug. 17, 1976; 47 FR 746, Jan. 7, 1982; Amdt. 42, 47 FR 14134, Apr. 2, 
1982; 60 FR 31222, June 13, 1995]

[[Page 111]]


<R05>
Sec. 220.15  Management evaluations and audits.

    (a)(1) The State agency shall ensure that all organizations within 
the State that administer or participate in the program covered by this 
part comply with the audit requirements of 7 CFR part 3015. The term 
``organization,'' as used in this section, shall refer to the entity 
whose financial management system controls the receipt, custody and 
disbursement of the Federal grant funds made available for the Program. 
The audits shall ascertain the effectiveness of the financial management 
systems and internal procedures that have been established by the 
auditee organization to meet the terms and conditions of its Federal 
grants. It is not required that the Program covered by this part be 
included in every audit. Rather, the audits shall be conducted on an 
organization-wide basis, and shall include an appropriate random 
sampling of Federal grant programs administered or operated by the 
auditee organization. The Program covered by this part shall be 
adequately represented in the universe from which each such sample is 
selected.
    (2) The State agency, or FCSRO where applicable, shall establish 
procedures to insure that it obtains the following information 
pertaining to each School Food Authority organization under its 
jurisdiction:
    (i) The names of the Federal grant programs included in each audit 
obtained by the School Food Authority pursuant to the requirements of 
this part, regardless of whether such programs include the Program 
covered by this part; and
    (ii) the nature of any deficiencies intrinsic to the auditee's 
grants management system as revealed by audit. When system deficiencies, 
as discussed in the preceding sentence, are reported in audits that did 
not specifically test the Program covered by this part, the State 
agency, or FCSRO where applicable, should make, or cause to be made, 
follow-up audits to determine the impact of such deficiencies upon the 
Program covered by this part. The State agency, or FCSRO where 
applicable, shall establish procedures to assure timely and appropriate 
resolution of audit findings and recommendations including findings 
relating to deficiencies such as those cited in paragraph (a)(2)(ii) of 
this section, which may impact upon the Program covered by this part.
    (3) Audits shall be made in accordance with generally accepted 
auditing standards, including the standards published by the General 
Accounting Office, Standards for Audit of Governmental Organizations, 
Programs, Activities and Functions. Audits may be made by any of the 
following audit groups:
    (i) School Food Authority and State agency staff auditors who are 
totally independent of the auditee;
    (ii) State Auditors General;
    (iii) State Comptrollers;
    (iv) Other comparable independent State audit groups;
    (v) Certified Public Accountants or
    (vi) State licensed public accountants.
    (4) Except as provided for in this section, each organization at the 
State agency and School Food Authority level shall obtain audits, 
meeting the conditions discussed in this section, on a continuing basis 
or at scheduled intervals, usually annually, but not less frequently 
than once every 2 years. The State agency, or FCSRO where applicable, 
may elect not to require this audit frequency of School Food Authority 
organizations to which both of the following conditions apply:
    (i) The only Federal grant program or programs operated by the 
School Food Authority organization are the Program covered by this part, 
the National School Lunch Program, the Special Milk Program for 
Children, or any combination of such programs; and (ii) the level of 
Federal grant funds disbursed to the School Food Authority organization 
in any fiscal year does not exceed $10,000; Provided, however, That the 
State agency, or FCSRO where applicable, shall make or require an audit 
of such a School Food Authority when conditions indicate a need for such 
an audit.
    (b) [Reserved]
    (c) While OA shall rely to the fullest extent feasible upon State 
sponsored audits, it shall, whenever considered necessary:
    (1) Make audits on a statewide basis,

[[Page 112]]

    (2) Perform on-site test audits, and
    (3) Review audit reports and related working papers of audits 
performed by or for State agencies.
    (d) Use of audit guides available from OA is encouraged. When these 
guides are utilized, OA will coordinate its audits with State sponsored 
audits to form a network of intergovernmental audit systems.
    (e) Each State agency shall provide FCS with full opportunity to 
conduct management evaluations (including visits to schools) of all 
operations of the State agency under the programs covered by this part 
and shall provide OA with full opportunity to conduct audits (including 
visits to schools) of all operations of the State agency under such 
programs. Each State agency shall make available its records, including 
records of the receipt and expenditure of funds under such programs, 
upon a reasonable request by FCS or OA. OA shall also have the right to 
make audits of the records and operations of any school.
    (f) In conducting management evaluations, reviews or audits for any 
fiscal year, the State agency, FCS, or OIG may disregard any overpayment 
if the total overpayment does not exceed $600 or, in the case of State 
agency claims in State administered Programs, it does not exceed the 
amount established under State law, regulations or procedure as a 
minimum amount for which claim will be made for State losses but not to 
exceed $600. However, no overpayment is to be disregarded where there is 
substantial evidence of violations of criminal law or civil fraud 
statutes.

(Secs. 805 and 819, Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 521-535 (42 U.S.C. 1773); 
sec. 812, Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 521-535 (42 U.S.C. 1759a))

[40 FR 30925, July 24, 1975. Redesignated and amended by Amdt. 25, 41 FR 
34757, 34760, Aug. 17, 1976; 43 FR 59825, Dec. 22, 1978; Amdt. 41, 47 FR 
14135, Apr. 2, 1982; Amdt. 43, 47 FR 18564, Apr. 30, 1982; Amdt. 56, 54 
FR 2990, Jan. 23, 1989; 57 FR 38587, Aug. 26, 1992; 59 FR 1894, Jan. 13, 
1994]


<R05>
Sec. 220.16  Procurement standards.

    (a) Requirements. State agencies and School Food Authorities shall 
comply with the requirements of the Office of Management and Budget 
(OMB) Circular A-102 and the Department's Uniform Federal Assistance 
Regulations, 7 CFR part 3015, subpart S (46 FR 55658) concerning the 
procurement of supplies, food, equipment and other services with Program 
funds. These requirements are adopted by FCS to ensure that such 
materials and services are obtained for the Program efficiently and 
economically and in compliance with applicable laws and executive 
orders.
    (b) Contractual responsibilities. The standards contained in OMB 
Circular A-102 and 7 CFR 3015, do not relieve the State agency or School 
Food Authority of any contractual responsibilities under its contract. 
The State agency or School Food Authority is the responsible authority, 
without recourse to FCS, regarding the settlement and satisfaction of 
all contractual and administrative issues arising out of procurements 
entered into in connection with the Program. This includes but is not 
limited to: source evaluation, protests, disputes, claims, or other 
matters of a contractual nature. Matters concerning violation of law are 
to be referred to the local, State or Federal authority that has proper 
jurisdiction.
    (c) Procurement procedure. The State agency or School Food Authority 
may use their own procurement procedures which reflect applicable State 
and local laws and regulations, provided that procurements made with 
Program funds adhere to the standards set forth in OMB Circular A-102 
and 7 CFR part 3015.

(Pub. L. 79-396, 60 Stat. 231 (42 U.S.C. 1751); Pub. L. 89-642, 80 Stat. 
885-890 (42 U.S.C. 1773); Pub. L. 91-248, 84 Stat. 207 (42 U.S.C. 1759))

[Amdt. 45, 48 FR 19355, Apr. 29, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 220.17   Prohibitions.

    (a) In carrying out the provisions of this part, neither the 
Department nor the State shall impose any requirements with respect to 
teaching personnel, curriculum, instructions, methods of instruction, 
and materials of instruction in any school as a condition for 
participation in the Program.
    (b) The value of assistance to children under the Act shall not be 
considered to be income or resources for any purposes under any Federal 
or State

[[Page 113]]

laws, including, but not limited to, laws relating to taxation, welfare, 
and public assistance programs. Expenditure of funds from State and 
local sources for the maintenance of food programs for children shall 
not be diminished as a result of funds received under the Act.

[32 FR 37, Jan. 5, 1967. Redesignated by Amdt. 2, 33 FR 14513, Sept. 27, 
1968. Redesignated and amended by Amdt. 25, 41 FR 34757, 34760, Aug. 17, 
1976]


<R05>
Sec. 220.18  Suspension, termination and grant closeout procedures.

    Whenever it is determined that a State agency has materially failed 
to comply with the provisions of this part, or with FCS guidelines and 
instructions, FCS may suspend or terminate the Program in whole, or in 
part, or take any other action as may be available and appropriate. A 
State agency may also terminate the Program by mutual agreement with 
FCS. FCS and the State agency shall comply with the provisions of the 
Department's Uniform Federal Assistance Regulations, 7 CFR part 3015, 
subpart N concerning grant suspension, termination and closeout 
procedures. Furthermore, the State agency or FCSRO were applicable, 
shall apply these provisions to suspension or termination of the Program 
in School Food Authorities.

[Amdt. 49, 49 FR 18988, May 4, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 220.19   Free and reduced price breakfasts.

    The determination of the children to whom free and reduced price 
breakfasts are to be served because of inability to pay the full price 
thereof, and the serving of the breakfasts to such children, shall be 
effected in accordance with part 245 of this chapter.

[Amdt. 25, 41 FR 34760, Aug. 17, 1976]


<R05>
Sec. 220.20   Program information.

    School Food Authorities desiring information concerning the program 
should write to their State educational agency or to the appropriate 
Food and Consumer Service Regional Office as indicated below:
    (a) In the States of Delaware, District of Columbia, Maryland, New 
Jersey, Pennsylvania, Puerto Rico, Virginia, Virgin Islands, and West 
Virginia: Mid-Atlantic Regional Office, FCS, U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Mercer Corporate Park, Corporate Boulevard, CN02150, 
Trenton, New Jersey 08650.
    (b) In the States of Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, 
Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Tennessee: Southeast 
Regional Office, FCS, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 1100 Spring 
Street, NW., Atlanta, Georgia 30367.
    (c) In the States of Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Ohio, 
and Wisconsin: Midwest Regional Office, FCS U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, 50 E. Washington Street, Chicago, Illinois 60602.
    (d) In the States of Arkansas, Louisiana, New Mexico, Oklahoma, and 
Texas: Southwest Regional Office, FCS, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
1100 Commerce Street, Room 5-C-30, Dallas, Texas 75202.
    (e) In the States of Alaska, American Samoa, Arizona, California, 
Guam, Hawaii, Idaho, Nevada, Oregon, the Trust Territory of the Pacific 
Islands, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Island, and 
Washington: Western Regional Office, FCS, U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, 550 Kearny Street, Room 400, San Francisco, California 
94108.
    (f) In the States of Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New 
Hampshire, New York, Rhode Island, and Vermont: Northeast Regional 
Office, FCS, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 10 Causeway Street, Room 
501, Boston, Massachusetts 02222-1065.
    (g) In the States of Colorado, Iowa, Kansas, Missouri, Montana, 
Nebraska, North Dakota, South Dakota, Utah, and Wyoming: Mountain Plains 
Regional Office, FCS, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 1244 Speer 
Boulevard, Suite 903, Denver, Colorado 80204.

(Sec. 10(a), Pub. L. 95-627, 92 Stat. 3623 (42 U.S.C. 1760); sec. 
10(d)(3), Pub. L. 95-627, 92 Stat. 3624 (42 U.S.C. 1757); sec. 14, Pub. 
L. 95-627, 92 Stat. 3625-3626; secs. 804, 816, 817 and 819, Pub. L. 97-
35, 95 Stat. 521-535 (42 U.S.C. 1753, 1756, 1759, 1771, 1773, and 1785))

[32 FR 37, Jan. 5, 1967. Redesignated at 49 FR 18988, May 4, 1984]


[[Page 114]]


    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting 
Sec. 220.20, see the List of CFR Sections Affected in the Finding Aids 
section of this volume.


<R05>
Sec. 220.21  Information collection/recordkeeping--OMB assigned control numbers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Current OMB
       7 CFR section where requirements are described          control  
                                                                number  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
220.3(e)...................................................    0584-0327
220.5......................................................    0584-0012
220.7(a)-(e)...............................................    0584-0329
                                                               0584-0012
                                                               0584-0026
220.8(f)...................................................    0584-0012
220.9(a)...................................................    0584-0012
220.11 (a), (b), (e).......................................    0584-0012
                                                               0584-0002
                                                               0584-0341
220.12(b)..................................................    0584-0012
220.13 (a-1)-(c), (f)......................................    0584-0026
                                                               0584-0002
                                                               0584-0341
                                                               0584-0012
220.14(d)..................................................    0584-0012
220.15.....................................................    0584-0012
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[Amdt. 56, 54 FR 2990, Jan. 23, 1989]

            Appendix A to Part 220--Alternate Foods for Meals

                     formulated grain-fruit products

    1. Schools may utilize the formulated grain-fruit products defined 
in paragraph 3 as a food component in meeting the meal requirements of 
this part under the following terms and conditions:
    (a) Formulated grain-fruit products may be used to meet one bread/
bread alternate and the fruit/vegetable requirement in the breakfast 
pattern specified in Sec. 220.8 or 220.8a, whichever is applicable.
    (b) Only individually wrapped formulated grain-fruit products which 
bear a label conforming to the following legend shall be utilized. 
``This product conforms to U.S.D.A. Child Nutrition Program 
specifications. For breakfast, it meets the requirements for fruit/
vegetable/juice and one bread/bread alternate.''
    2. Only formulated grain-fruit products that have been accepted by 
the Food and Consumer Service (FCS) for use in the USDA child nutrition 
programs may be labeled as provided in paragraph 1.(b) of this appendix. 
Manufacturers seeking acceptance of their product shall furnish FCS a 
chemical analysis, protein efficiency ratio analysis, and such other 
pertinent data as may be requested by FCS. This information shall be 
forwarded to: Director, Nutrition and Technical Services Staff, Food and 
Consumer Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Alexandria, Virginia 
22302. All laboratory analyses are to be performed by independent or 
other laboratories acceptable to FCS. (FCS prefers an independent 
laboratory.) All laboratories shall retain the ``raw'' laboratory data 
for a period of one year. Such information shall be made available to 
FCS upon request.
    3. To be accepted by FCS, products must have the following 
characteristics and meet the following nutritional specifications:
    (a) Types. There are two types of products: one is a grain-type 
product and the other a grain-fruit type product.
    (b) Ingredients. A grain-type product shall have grain as its 
primary ingredient. A grain-fruit type product shall have fruit as its 
primary ingredient. Both types of products must have at least 25 percent 
of their weight derived from grain. All ingredients and/or components 
shall comply with pertinent requirements or standards of the USDA and 
the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, as amended, and any regulations issued 
thereunder.
    (c) Nutritional specifications. Each serving of the product shall 
meet the minimum compositional requirements in the following table. The 
requirements as specified for those nutrients not limited by maximum 
values will be deemed to have been met if reasonable overages of the 
vitamins and minerals, within the limits of good manufacturing practice, 
are present to insure that the required levels are maintained throughout 
the expected shelf life under customary conditions of distribution and 
storage. An exception will be made for vitamins or minerals which occur 
naturally in an ingredient at such concentration that the level 
specified will be substantially exceeded in the final product. Such 
excess will be permitted but no lable claim of nutritional advantage can 
be made for overages for any nutrients. Analytical methods employed 
should be according to the standard procedures defined in the 
Association of Official Analytical Chemists, 1970, ``Official Methods of 
Analysis,'' 11th edition, Washington, DC or by appropriate analytical 
procedures FCS considers reliable.

             Nutritional Levels of Grain-Fruit Products \1\             
------------------------------------------------------------------------
            Nutrient                      Unit          Minimum  Maximum
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Weight..........................  Ounce...............        2      4.0
PER.............................  Casein=2.5..........      2.0  .......
Moisture........................  Percent weight......  .......     40.0
Fat \2\.........................  ......do............  .......     22.0
Fiber...........................  ......do............  .......      0.8
Protein (N x 6.25)..............  Gram................      5.0  .......
Energy..........................  Kilocalorie.........      250  .......
Vitamin A \3\...................  International unit..    1,115  1,675.0
Vitamin E.......................  ......do............        5  .......
Vitamin B<INF>12.....................  Microgram...........     1.25  .......
Thiamin.........................  Milligram...........      .26  .......
Riboflavin......................  ......do............      .13  .......

[[Page 115]]

                                                                        
Vitamin B<INF>6......................  ......do............      .26  .......
Vitamin C.......................  ......do............       20  .......
Niacin..........................  ......do............     2.65  .......
Folacin.........................  ......do............      .04  .......
Iron \4\........................  ......do............      4.4  .......
Calcium.........................  ......do............      120  .......
Phosphorus......................  ......do............      120  .......
Magnesium.......................  ......do............       30  .......
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ These specifications are based on a nutrient level for acceptable   
  products plus \1/2\ pint of fluid milk (as defined in Sec.  220.2 of  
  the regulations (7 CFR part 220)) to provide at least 25 percent of   
  the Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDA), 1968, for 10- to 12-year-old
  boys and girls for specified nutrients except magnesium and           
  kilocalories. Magnesium and kilocalories--at least 13 percent of this 
  RDA.                                                                  
\2\ Although the maximum fat in these specifications is 22 percent,     
  consideration should be given to the development of formulated items  
  containing less fat. Most medical authorities recommend keeping the   
  dietary intake of fats at about \1/3\ of the day's calories. At least 
  5 percent of the total calories shall be from linoleic acid.          
\3\ Vitamin A levels above the maximum of 1,675 I.U. will be allowed in 
  products containing this nutrient as a natural food, and if the       
  vitamin has not been added to the ingredients or foods.               
\4\ Recommended sources of iron are ferric ammonium citrate, ferrous    
  fumarate, ferrous sulfates (FeSO<INF>4 or FeSO<INF>4 7H<INF>2O), ferrous gluconate,  
  reduced iron, or other sources known to have a similar relative       
  biological value.                                                     


(Secs. 804, 816, 817, and 819, Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 521-535 (42 
U.S.C. 1753, 1756, 1759, 1771, 1773 and 1785))

[Amdt. 18, 39 FR 11249, Mar. 27, 1974, as amended at 40 FR 37027, Aug. 
25, 1975; Amdt. 45, 48 FR 195, Jan. 4, 1983; Amdt. 57, 54 FR 13048, Mar. 
30, 1989; 60 FR 31222, June 13, 1995]

Appendix B to Part 220--Categories of Foods of Minimal Nutritional Value

    (1) Soda Water--A class of beverages made by absorbing carbon 
dioxide in potable water. The amount of carbon dioxide used is not less 
than that which will be absorbed by the beverage at a pressure of one 
atmosphere and at a temperature of 60 deg. F. It either contains no 
alcohol or only such alcohol, not in excess of 0.5 percent by weight of 
the finished beverage, as is contributed by the flavoring ingredient 
used. No product shall be excluded from this definition because it 
contains artificial sweeteners or discrete nutrients added to the food 
such as vitamins, minerals and protein.
    (2) Water ices. As defined by 21 CFR 135.160 Food and Drug 
Administration Regulations except that water ices which contain fruit or 
fruit juices are not included in this definition.
    (3) Chewing gum. Flavored products from natural or synthetic gums 
and other ingredients which form an insoluble mass for chewing.
    (4) Certain candies. Processed foods made predominantly from 
sweeteners or artificial sweeteners with a variety of minor ingredients 
which characterize the following types: (a) Hard candy. A product made 
predominantly from sugar (sucrose) and corn syrup which may be flavored 
and colored, is characterized by a hard, brittle texture, and includes 
such items as sour balls, fruit balls, candy sticks, lollipops, 
starlight mints, after dinner mints, sugar wafers, rock candy, cinnamon 
candies, breath mints, jaw breakers and cough drops.
    (b) Jellies and gums. A mixture of carbohydrates which are combined 
to form a stable gelatinous system of jelly-like character, and are 
generally flavored and colored, and include gum drops, jelly beans, 
jellied and fruit-flavored slices.
    (c) Marshmallow candies. An aerated confection composed of sugar, 
corn syrup, invert sugar, 20% water and gelatin or egg white to which 
flavors and colors may be added.
    (d) Fondant. A product consisting of microscopic-sized sugar 
crystals which are separated by a thin film of sugar and/or invert sugar 
in solution such as candy corn, soft mints.
    (e) Licorice. A product made predominantly from sugar and corn syrup 
which is flavored with an extract made from the licorice root.
    (f) Spun candy. A product that is made from sugar that has been 
boiled at high temperature and spun at a high speed in a special 
machine.
    (g) Candy coated popcorn. Popcorn which is coated with a mixture 
made predominantly from sugar and corn syrup.

                    Schedule for Amending Appendix B                    
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                Publication             
     Actions for publication     ---------------------------------------
                                          May              November     
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Deadline for receipt of           Nov. 15...........  May 15.           
 petitions by USDA.                                                     
USDA to notify petitioners of     Feb. 1............  Aug. 1.           
 results of Departmental review                                         
 and publish proposed rule (if                                          
 applicable).                                                           
60 Day Comment Period...........  Feb 1 through Apr.  Aug. 1 through    
                                   1.                  Oct. 1.          
Public Notice of Amendment of     May 1.............  Nov. 1.           
 Appendix B by.                                                         
------------------------------------------------------------------------



[[Page 116]]

Written petitions should be sent to the Chief, Technical Assistance 
Branch, Nutrition and Technical Services Divisions, FCS, USDA, 
Alexandria, Virginia 22302 on or before November 15 or May 15 of each 
year. Petitions must include all information specified in 
Sec. 210.15b(b) (1) or (2), and Sec. 220.12(b) (1) or (2) as 
appropriate.

(Sec. 17, Pub. L. 95-166, 91 Stat. 1345 (42 U.S.C. 1779); secs. 804, 
816, 817 and 819, Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 521-535 (42 U.S.C. 1753, 1756, 
1759, 1771, 1773 and 1785))

[Amdt. 32, 45 FR 6772, Jan. 29, 1980, as amended at 45 FR 72081, Oct. 
31, 1980; 45 FR 76937, Nov. 21, 1980; Amdt. 45, 48 FR 195, Jan. 4, 1983; 
54 FR 18466, May 1, 1989]

      Appendix C to Part 220--Child Nutrition (CN) Labeling Program

    1. The Child Nutrition (CN) Labeling Program is a voluntary 
technical assistance program administered by the Food and Consumer 
Service (FCS) in conjunction with the Food Safety and Inspection Service 
(FSIS), and Agricultural Marketing Service (AMS) of the U.S. Department 
of Agriculture (USDA), and National Marine Fisheries Service of the U.S. 
Department of Commerce (USDC) for the Child Nutrition Programs. This 
program essentially involves the review of a manufacturer's recipe or 
product formulation to determine the contribution a serving of a 
commercially prepared product makes toward meal pattern requirements and 
a review of the CN label statement to ensure its accuracy. CN labeled 
products must be produced in accordance with all requirements set forth 
in this rule.
    2. Products eligible for CN labels are as follows:
    (a) Commercially prepared food products that contribute 
significantly to the meat/meat alternate component of meal pattern 
requirements of 7 CFR 210.10 or 210.10a, whichever ia applicable, 
225.21, and 226.20 and are served in the main dish.
    (b) Juice drinks and juice drink products that contain a minimum of 
50 percent full-strength juice by volume.
    3. For the purpose of this appendix the following definitions apply:
    (a) ``CN label'' is a food product label that contains a CN label 
statement and CN logo as defined in paragraph 3 (b) and (c) below.
    (b) The ``CN logo'' (as shown below) is a distinct border which is 
used around the edges of a ``CN label statement'' as defined in 
paragraph 3(c).
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC17SE91.003

    (c) The ``CN label statement'' includes the following:
    (1) The product identification number (assigned by FCS),
    (2) The statement of the product's contribution toward meal pattern 
requirements of 7 CFR 210.10 or 210.10a, whichever is applicable, 220.8 
or 220.8a, whichever is applicable, 225.21, and 226.20. The statement 
shall identify the contribution of a specific portion of a meat/meat 
alternate product toward the meat/meat alternate, bread/bread alternate, 
and/or vegetable/fruit component of the meal pattern requirements. For 
juice drinks and juice drink products the statement shall identify their 
contribution toward the vegetable/fruit component of the meal pattern 
requirements,
    (3) Statement specifying that the use of the CN logo and CN 
statement was authorized by FCS, and
    (4) The approval date.
    For example:

[[Page 117]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC17SE91.004


    (d) Federal inspection means inspection of food products by FSIS, 
AMS or USDC.
    4. Food processors or manufacturers may use the CN label statement 
and CN logo as defined in paragraph 3 (b) and (c) under the following 
terms and conditions:
    (a) The CN label must be reviewed and approved at the national level 
by the Food and Consumer Service and appropriate USDA or USDC Federal 
agency responsible for the inspection of the product.
    (b) The CN labeled product must be produced under Federal inspection 
by USDA or USDC. The Federal inspection must be performed in accordance 
with an approved partial or total quality control program or standards 
established by the appropriate Federal inspection service.
    (c) The CN label statement must be printed as an integral part of 
the product label along with the product name, ingredient listing, the 
inspection shield or mark for the appropriate inspection program, the 
establishment number where appropriate, and the manufacturer's or 
distributor's name and address.
    (1) The inspection marking for CN labeled non-meat, non-poultry, and 
non-seafood products with the exception of juice drinks and juice drink 
products is established as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC17SE91.005

    (d) Yields for determining the product's contribution toward meal 
pattern requirements must be calculated using the Food Buying Guide for 
Child Nutrition Programs (Program Aid Number 1331).
    5. In the event a company uses the CN logo and CN label statement 
inappropriately, the company will be directed to discontinue the use of 
the logo and statement and the matter will be referred to the 
appropriate agency for action to be taken against the company.
    6. Products that bear a CN label statement as set forth in paragraph 
3(c) carry a warranty. This means that if a food service authority 
participating in the child nutrition programs purchases a CN labeled 
product and uses it in accordance with the manufacturer's directions, 
the school or institution will not have an audit claim filed against it 
for the CN labeled product for noncompliance with the meal pattern 
requirements of 7 CFR 210.10 or 210.10a, whichever is applicable, 220.8 
or 220.8a, whichever is applicable, 225.21, and 226.20. If a State or 
Federal auditor finds that a product that is CN labeled does not 
actually meet the meal pattern requirements claimed on the label, the 
auditor will report this finding to FCS. FCS will prepare a report of 
the findings and send it to the appropriate divisions of FSIS and AMS of 
the USDA, National Marine Fisheries Services of the USDC, Food and Drug 
Administration, or the Department of Justice for action against the 
company.
    Any or all of the following courses of action may be taken:
    (a) The company's CN label may be revoked for a specific period of 
time;
    (b) The appropriate agency may pursue a misbranding or mislabeling 
action against the company producing the product;
    (c) The company's name will be circulated to regional FCS offices;
    (d) FCS will require the food service program involved to notify the 
State agency of the labeling violation.
    7. FCS is authorized to issue operational policies, procedures, and 
instructions for the CN Labeling Program.
    To apply for a CN label and to obtain additional information on CN 
label application procedures write to: CN Labels, U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Food and Consumer Service, Nutrition and Technical Services 
Division, 3101 Park Center Drive, Alexandria, Virginia 22302.

(National School Lunch Act, secs. 9, 13, 17; 42 U.S.C. 1758, 1761, 1766; 
7 CFR 210.10, 220.8, 225.21, 226.20)

[49 FR 18457, May 1, 1984; 49 FR 45109, Nov. 15, 1984; 60 FR 31222, June 
13, 1995]


<R03>
PART 225--SUMMER FOOD SERVICE PROGRAM--Table of Contents

<R05>


                           Subpart A--General

Sec.
225.1  General purpose and scope.
225.2  Definitions.
225.3  Administration.

[[Page 118]]

                   Subpart B--State Agency Provisions

225.4  Program management and administration plan.
225.5  Payments to State agencies and use of Program funds.
225.6  State agency responsibilities.
225.7  Program monitoring and assistance.
225.8  Records and reports.
225.9  Program assistance to sponsors.
225.10  Audits and management evaluations.
225.11  Corrective action procedures.
225.12  Claims against sponsors.
225.13  Appeal procedures.

                 Subpart C--Sponsor and Site Provisions

225.14  Requirements for sponsor participation.
225.15  Management responsibilities of sponsors.
225.16  Meal service requirements.

              Subpart D--General Administrative Provisions

225.17  Procurement standards.
225.18  Miscellaneous administrative provisions.
225.19  Regional office addresses.
225.20  Information collection/recordkeeping--OMB assigned control 
          numbers.

Appendix A to Part 225--Alternate Foods for Meals
Appendix B to Part 225--[Reserved]
Appendix C to Part 225--Child Nutrition (CN) Labeling Program

    Authority: Secs. 9, 13 and 14, National School Lunch Act, as amended 
(42 U.S.C. 1758, 1761 and 1762a).

    Source: 54 FR 18208, Apr. 27, 1989, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                           Subpart A--General


<R05>
Sec. 225.1  General purpose and scope.

    This part establishes the regulations under which the Secretary will 
administer a Summer Food Service Program. Section 13 of the Act 
authorizes the Secretary to assist States through grants-in-aid to 
conduct nonprofit food service programs for children during the summer 
months and at other approved times. The primary purpose of the Program 
is to provide food service to children from needy areas during periods 
when area schools are closed for vacation.


<R05>
Sec. 225.2  Definitions.

    Academic-Year NYSP means that portion of the NYSP operating drug 
awareness and counseling programs during the months October through 
April, as authorized under Public Law 100-690, the Anti-Drug Abuse Act 
of 1988.
    Act means the National School Lunch Act, as amended.
    Administrative costs means costs incurred by a sponsor related to 
planning, organizing, and managing a food service under the Program, and 
excluding interest costs and operating costs.
    Adult means, for the purposes of the collection of social security 
numbers as a condition of eligibility for Program meals, any individual 
21 years of age or older.
    Advance payments means financial assistance made available to a 
sponsor for its operating costs and/or administrative costs prior to the 
end of the month in which such costs will be incurred.
    AFDC assistance unit means any individual or group of individuals 
which is currently certified to receive assistance under the Aid to 
Families with Dependent Children Program in a State where the standard 
of eligibility for AFDC benefits does not exceed the income standards 
for free meals under the National School Lunch Program (7 CFR part 245).
    Areas in which poor economic conditions exist means (a) the local 
areas from which a site draws its attendance in which at least 50 
percent of the children are eligible for free or reduced price school 
meals under the National School Lunch Program and the School Breakfast 
Program, as determined (1) by information provided from departments of 
welfare, education, zoning commissions, census tracts, and organizations 
determined by the State agency to be migrant organizations, (2) by the 
number of free and reduced price lunches or breakfasts served to 
children attending public and nonprofit private schools located in the 
areas of Program sites, or (3) from other appropriate sources, or
    (b) An enrollment program in which at least 50 percent of the 
enrolled children at the site are eligible for free or reduced price 
school meals as determined by approval of applications in accordance 
with Sec. 225.15(f) of this part.

[[Page 119]]

    Camps means residential summer camps and nonresidential day camps 
which offer a regularly scheduled food service as part of an organized 
program for enrolled children. Nonresidential camp sites shall offer a 
continuous schedule of organized cultural or recreational programs for 
enrolled children between meal services.
    Children means (a) persons 18 years of age and under, and (b) 
persons over 18 years of age who are determined by a State educational 
agency or a local public educational agency of a State to be mentally or 
physically handicapped and who participate in a public or nonprofit 
private school program established for the mentally or physically 
handicapped.
    Continuous school calendar means a situation in which all or part of 
the student body of a school is (a) on a vacation for periods of 15 
continuous school days or more during the period October through April 
and (b) in attendance at regularly scheduled classes during most of the 
period May through September.
    Costs of obtaining food means costs related to obtaining food for 
consumption by children. Such costs may include, in addition to the 
purchase price of agricultural commodities and other food, the cost of 
processing, distributing, transporting, storing, or handling any food 
purchased for, or donated to, the Program.
    Current income means income, as defined in Section 225.15(f)(2)(iv), 
received during the month prior to application for free meals. If such 
income does not accurately reflect the household's annual income, income 
shall be based on the projected annual household income. If the prior 
year's income provides an accurate reflection of the household's current 
annual income, the prior year may be used as a base for the projected 
annual income.
    Department means the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
    Documentation means (a) the completion of the following information 
on a free meal application:
    (1) names of all household members;
    (2) income received by each household member, identified by source 
of income (such as earnings, wages, welfare, pensions, support payments, 
unemployment compensation, social security and other cash income);
    (3) the signature of an adult household member; and
    (4) the social security number of the adult household member who 
signs the application, or an indication that the he/she does not possess 
a social security number; or,
    (b) For a child who is a member of a food stamp household or an AFDC 
assistance unit, ``documentation'' means completion of only the 
following information on a free meal application: (1) The name(s) and 
appropriate food stamp or AFDC case number(s) for the child(ren); and 
(2) the signature of an adult member of the household.
    Family means a group of related or nonrelated individuals who are 
not residents of an institution or boarding house but who are living as 
one economic unit.
    Fiscal year means the period beginning October 1 of any calendar 
year and ending September 30 of the following calendar year.
    FCS means the Food and Consumer Service of the Department.
    FCSRO means the appropriate FCS Regional Office.
    Food service management company means any commercial enterprise or 
nonprofit organization with which a sponsor may contract for preparing 
unitized meals, with or without milk, for use in the Program, or for 
managing a sponsor's food service operations in accordance with the 
limitations set forth in Sec. 225.15. Food service management companies 
may be: (a) Public agencies or entities; (b) private, nonprofit 
organizations; or (c) private, for-profit companies.
    Food stamp household means any individual or group of individuals 
which is currently certified to receive assistance as a household under 
the Food Stamp Program.
    Homeless feeding site means a feeding site whose primary purpose is 
to provide shelter and one or more regularly scheduled meal services per 
day to homeless families and which is not a residential child care 
institution as defined in paragraph (c), definition of `school', 
Sec. 210.2 of the National School Lunch Program regulations.

[[Page 120]]

    Household means ``family,'' as defined in this section.
    Income accruing to the program means all funds used by a sponsor in 
its food service program, including but not limited to all monies, other 
than program payments, received from Federal, State and local 
governments, from food sales to adults, and from any other source 
including cash donations or grants. Income accruing to the Program will 
be deducted from combined operating and administrative costs.
    Income standards means the family-size and income standards 
prescribed annually by the Secretary for determining eligibility for 
reduced price meals under the National School Lunch Program and the 
School Breakfast Program.
    Meals means food which is served to children at a food service site 
and which meets the nutritional requirements set out in this part.
    Milk means whole milk, lowfat milk, skim milk, and buttermilk. All 
milk must be fluid and pasteurized and must meet State and local 
standards for the appropriate type of milk. Milk served may be flavored 
or unflavored. In Alaska, Hawaii, American Samoa, Guam, Puerto Rico, the 
Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, the Northern Mariana Islands, 
and the Virgin Islands of the United States, if a sufficient supply of 
such types of fluid milk cannot be obtained, reconstituted or recombined 
milk may be used. All milk should contain Vitamins A and D at the levels 
specified by the Food and Drug Administration and at levels consistent 
with State and local standards for such milk.
    Needy children means children from families whose incomes are equal 
to or below the Secretary's Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Reduced Price School Meals.
    NYSP means the National Youth Sports Program administered by the 
National Collegiate Athletic Association.
    NYSP feeding site means a site which qualifies for Program 
participation on the basis of free meal applications taken from enrolled 
children and at which all of the children receiving Program meals are 
enrolled in the NYSP.
    OIG means the Office of the Inspector General of the Department.
    Operating costs means the cost of operating a food service under the 
Program,
    (a) Including the (1) cost of obtaining food, (2) labor directly 
involved in the preparation and service of food, (3) cost of nonfood 
supplies, (4) rental and use allowances for equipment and space, and (5) 
cost of transporting children in rural areas to feeding sites in rural 
areas, but
    (b) Excluding (1) the cost of the purchase of land, acquisition or 
construction of buildings, (2) alteration of existing buildings, (3) 
interest costs, (4) the value of in-kind donations, and (5) 
administrative costs.
    Private nonprofit means tax exempt under the Internal Revenue Code 
of 1986, as amended.
    Private nonprofit organization means an organization (other than 
private nonprofit residential camps, school food authorities, or 
colleges or universities participating in the NYSP) which meets the 
definition of ``private nonprofit'' in this section and which:
    (a) Serves a total of not more than 2,500 children per day;
    (b) Administers the Program at no more than five sites in any urban 
area or 20 sites in any rural area, with not more than 300 children 
being served at any approved meal service at any one site (or, with a 
waiver granted by the State in accordance with Sec. 225.6(b)(6)(iii) of 
this part, not more than 500 children being served at any approved meal 
service at any one site);
    (c) Either uses self-preparation facilities to prepare meals or 
obtains meals from a public facility (such as a school district, public 
hospital, or State university) or a school participating in the National 
School Lunch Program;
    (d) Operates in areas where a school food authority or the local, 
municipal, or county government has not indicated by March 1 of the 
current year that such authority or unit of government will operate the 
Program in the current year (except that, if a school food authority or 
local, municipal, or county government has served that area in the prior 
year's Program, the private nonprofit organization may only sponsor the 
Program in that area

[[Page 121]]

if it receives a waiver from the State agency in accordance with 
Sec. 225.6(a)(3)(iv)(B));
    (e) Exercises full control and authority over the operation of the 
Program at all sites under its sponsorship;
    (f) Provides ongoing year-round activities for children or families;
    (g) Demonstrates that it possesses adequate management and the 
fiscal capacity to operate the Program; and
    (h) Meets applicable State and local health, safety, and sanitation 
standards.
    Program means the Summer Food Service Program for Children 
authorized by Section 13 of the Act.
    Program funds means Federal financial assistance made available to 
State agencies for the purpose of making Program payments.
    Program payments means financial assistance in the form of start-up 
payments, advance payments, or reimbursement paid to sponsors for 
operating and administrative costs.
    Rural means (a) any area in a county which is not a part of a 
Metropolitan Statistical Area or (b) any ``pocket'' within a 
Metropolitan Statistical Area which, at the option of the State agency 
and with FCSRO concurrence, is determined to be geographically isolated 
from urban areas.
    School food authority means the governing body which is responsible 
for the administration of one or more schools and which has the legal 
authority to operate a lunch program in those schools. In addition, for 
the purpose of determining the applicability of food service management 
company registration and bid procedure requirements, ``school food 
authority'' also means any college or university which participates in 
the Program.
    Secretary means the Secretary of Agriculture.
    Self-preparation sponsor means a sponsor which prepares the meals 
that will be served at its site(s) and does not contract with a food 
service management company for unitized meals, with or without milk, or 
for management services.
    Session means a specified period of time during which an enrolled 
group of children attend camp.
    Site means a physical location at which a sponsor provides a food 
service for children and at which children consume meals in a supervised 
setting.
    Special account means an account which a State agency may require a 
vended sponsor to establish with the State agency or with a Federally 
insured bank. Operating costs payable to the sponsor by the State agency 
are deposited in the account and disbursement of monies from the account 
must be authorized by both the sponsor and the food service management 
company.
    Sponsor means a public or private nonprofit school food authority, a 
public or private nonprofit residential summer camp, a unit of local, 
municipal, county or State government, a public or private nonprofit 
college or university currently participating in the NYSP, or a private 
nonprofit organization which develops a special summer or other school 
vacation program providing food service similar to that made available 
to children during the school year under the National School Lunch and 
School Breakfast Programs and which is approved to participate in the 
Program. In addition, ``sponsor'' may also mean a public or private 
nonprofit college or university which participates in the NYSP during 
the months of October through April and is approved to participate in 
the Program. Sponsors are referred to in the Act as ``service 
institutions''.
    Start-up payments means financial assistance made available to a 
sponsor for administrative costs to enable it to effectively plan a 
summer food service, and to establish effective management procedures 
for such a service. These payments shall be deducted from subsequent 
administrative cost payments.
    State means any of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, the 
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands of the United States, 
Guam, American Samoa, the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, and 
the Northern Mariana Islands.
    State agency means the State educational agency or an alternate 
agency that has been designated by the Governor or other appropriate 
executive or legislative authority of the State and which has been 
approved by the Department to administer the Program

[[Page 122]]

within the State, or, in States where FCS administers the Program, 
FCSRO.
    Unit of local, municipal, county or State government means an entity 
which is so recognized by the State constitution or State laws, such as 
the State administrative procedures act, tax laws, or other applicable 
State laws which delineate authority for government responsibility in 
the State.
    Vended sponsor means a sponsor which purchases from a food service 
management company the unitized meals, with or without milk, which it 
will serve at its site(s), or a sponsor which purchases management 
services, subject to the limitations set forth in Sec. 225.15, from a 
food service management company.
    Yogurt means commercially prepared coagulated milk products obtained 
by the fermentation of specific bacteria, that meet milk fat or milk 
solid requirements and to which flavoring foods or ingredients may be 
added. These products are covered by the Food and Drug Administration's 
Standard of Identity for yogurt, lowfat yogurt, and nonfat yogurt, (21 
CFR 131.200), (21 CFR 131.203), (21 CFR 131.206), respectively.

[54 FR 18208, Apr. 27, 1989, as amended at 54 FR 27153, June 28, 1989; 
55 FR 13466, Apr. 10, 1990; 61 FR 25553, May 22, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 225.3  Administration.

    (a) Responsibility within the Department. FCS shall act on behalf of 
the Department in the administration of the Program.
    (b) State administered programs. Within the State, responsibility 
for the administration of the Program shall be in the State agency. With 
the exception of State agencies having academic-year NYSP sponsors, each 
State agency shall notify the Department by November 1 of the fiscal 
year regarding its intention to administer the Program. Those State 
agencies whose Program will include academic-year NYSP sponsors shall 
enter into an agreement with FCS by October 1 which shall cover the 
entire fiscal year and shall administer the Program for all eligible 
sponsors within the State during the agreement period. Each State agency 
desiring to take part in the Program shall enter into a written 
agreement with FCS for the administration of the Program in accordance 
with the provisions of this part. The agreement shall cover the 
operation of the Program during the period specified therein and may be 
extended by written consent of both parties. The agreement shall contain 
an assurance that the State agency will comply with the Department's 
nondiscrimination regulations (7 CFR part 15) issued under title VI of 
the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and any Instructions issued by FCS 
pursuant to those regulations, title IX of the Education Amendments of 
1972, and section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973. However, if a 
State educational agency is not permitted by law to disburse funds to 
any of the nonpublic schools in the State, the Secretary shall disburse 
the funds directly to such schools within the State for the same 
purposes and subject to the same conditions as the disbursements to 
public schools within the State by the State educational agency.
    (c) Regional office administered programs. The Secretary shall not 
administer the Program in the States, except that if a FCSRO has 
continuously administered the Program in any State since October 1, 
1980, FCS shall continue to administer the Program in that State. In 
States in which FCSRO administers the Program, it shall have all of the 
responsibilities of a State agency and shall earn State administrative 
and Program funds as set forth in this part. A State in which FCS 
administers the Program may, upon request to FCS, assume administration 
of the Program.

[54 FR 18208, Apr. 27, 1989, as amended at 55 FR 13466, Apr. 10, 1990]


<R04>
                   Subpart B--State Agency Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 225.4  Program management and administration plan.

    (a) Not later than February 15 of each year, each State agency shall 
submit to FCSRO a Program management and administration plan for that 
fiscal year.
    (b) Each plan shall be acted on or approved by March 15 or, if it is 
submitted late, within 30 calendar days of receipt of the plan. If the 
plan initially submitted is not approved, the State

[[Page 123]]

agency and FCS shall work together to ensure that changes to the plan, 
in the form of amendments, are submitted so that the plan can be 
approved within 60 calendar days following the initial submission of the 
plan. Upon approval of the plan, the State agency shall be notified of 
the level of State administrative funding which it is assured of 
receiving under Sec. 225.5(a)(3).
    (c) Approval of the Plan by FCS shall be a prerequisite to the 
withdrawal of Program funds by the State from the Letter of Credit and 
to the donation by the Department of any commodities for use in the 
State's Program.
    (d) The Plan shall include, at a minimum, the following information:
    (1) The State's administrative budget for the fiscal year, and the 
State's plan to comply with any standards prescribed by the Secretary 
for the use of these funds;
    (2) The State's plans for use of Program funds and funds from within 
the State to the maximum extent practicable to reach needy children, 
including the State's methods for assessing need, its plans and schedule 
for informing sponsors of the availability of the Program, and, 
beginning in Fiscal Year 1991, its plans for making efforts to inform 
private nonprofit organizations of their potential eligibility for 
Program sponsorship;
    (3) The State's best estimate of the number and character of 
sponsors and sites to be approved, the number of means to be served, the 
number of children who will participate, and a description of the 
estimating methods used by the State. Estimates of participation by 
private nonprofit organizations and their potential impact on the number 
of children and meals served need not be included in the plan until 
Fiscal Year 1991;
    (4) The State's schedule for application by sponsors;
    (5) The actions to be taken to maximize the use of meals prepared by 
sponsors and to maximize the use of school food service facilities;
    (6) The State's plans and schedule for providing technical 
assistance and training to eligible sponsors;
    (7) The State's plans for monitoring and inspecting sponsors, 
feeding sites, and food service management companies and for ensuring 
that such companies do not enter into contracts for more meals than they 
can provide effectively and efficiently;
    (8) The State's plan and schedule for registering food service 
management companies;
    (9) The State's plan for timely and effective action against Program 
violators;
    (10) The State's plan for determining the amounts of Program 
payments to sponsors and for disbursing such payments;
    (11) The State's plan for ensuring the fiscal integrity of sponsors 
not subject to auditing requirements prescribed by the Secretary;
    (12) The State's procedure for granting a hearing and prompt 
determination to any sponsors wishing to appeal a State ruling, as 
specified in Sec. 225.13;
    (13) Beginning January 1, 1990, the State's plan for ensuring 
compliance with the food service management company procurement 
monitoring requirements set forth at Sec. 225.6(h); and
    (14) Beginning January 1, 1990, an estimate of the State's need, if 
any, for monies available to pay for the cost of conducting health 
inspections and meal quality tests.

[54 FR 18208, Apr. 27, 1989, as amended at 55 FR 13466, Apr. 10, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 225.5  Payments to State agencies and use of Program funds.

    (a) State administrative funds. (1) Administrative funding formula. 
For each fiscal year, FCS shall pay to each State agency for 
administrative expenses incurred in the Program an amount equal to
    (i) 20 percent of the first $50,000 in Program funds properly 
payable to the State in the preceding fiscal year;
    (ii) 10 percent of the next $100,000 in Program funds properly 
payable to the State in the preceding fiscal year;
    (iii) 5 percent of the next $250,000 in Program funds properly 
payable to the State in the preceding fiscal year; and
    (iv) 2\1/2\ percent of any remaining Program funds properly payable 
to the State in the preceding fiscal year,
Provided, however, That FCS may make appropriate adjustments in the 
level of State administrative funds to reflect

[[Page 124]]

changes in Program size from the preceding fiscal year as evidenced by 
information submitted in the State Program management and administration 
plan and any other information available to FCS. If a State agency fails 
to submit timely and accurate reports under Sec. 225.8(c) of this part, 
State administrative funds payable under this paragraph shall be subject 
to sanction. For such failure, FCS may recover, withhold, or cancel 
payment of up to one hundred percent of the funds payable to the State 
agency under this paragraph during the fiscal year.
    (2) Use of State administrative funds. State administrative funds 
paid to any State shall be used by State agencies to employ personnel, 
including travel and related expenses, and to supervise and give 
technical assistance to sponsors in their initiation, expansion, and 
conduct of any food service for which Program funds are made available. 
State agencies may also use administrative funds for such other 
administrative expenses as are set forth in their approved Program 
management and administration plan.
    (3) Funding assurance. At the time FCS approves the State's 
management and administration plan, the State shall be assured of 
receiving State administrative funding equal to the lesser of the 
following amounts: 80 percent of the amount obtained by applying the 
formula set forth in paragraph (a)(1) of this section to the total 
amount of Program payments made within the State during the prior fiscal 
year; or, 80 percent of the amount obtained by applying the formula set 
forth in paragraph (a)(1) to the amount of Program funds estimated to be 
needed in the management and administration plan. The State agency shall 
be assured that it will receive no less than this level unless FCS 
determines that the State agency has failed or is failing to meet its 
responsibilities under this part.
    (4) Limitation. In no event may the total payment for State 
administrative costs in any fiscal year exceed the total amount of 
expenditures incurred by the State agency in administering the Program.
    (b) State administrative funds Letter of Credit. (1) At the 
beginning of each fiscal year, FCS shall make available to each 
participating State agency by Letter of Credit an initial allocation of 
State administrative funds for use in that fiscal year. This allocation 
shall not exceed one-third of the administrative funds provided to the 
State in the preceding fiscal year. For State agencies which did not 
receive any Program funds during the preceding fiscal year, the amount 
to be made available shall be determined by FCS.
    (2) Additional State administrative funds shall be made available 
upon the receipt and approval by FCS of the State's Program management 
and administration plan. The amount of such funds, plus the initial 
allocation, shall not exceed 80 percent of the State administrative 
funds determined by the formula set forth in paragraph (a)(1) of this 
section and based on the estimates set forth in the approved Program 
management and administration plan.
    (3) Any remaining State administrative funds shall be paid to each 
State agency as soon as practicable after the conduct of the funding 
assessment described in paragraph (c) of this section. However, 
regardless of whether such assessment is made, the remaining 
administrative funds shall be paid no later than September 1. The 
remaining administrative payment shall be in an amount equal to that 
determined to be needed during the funding evaluation or, if such 
evaluation is not conducted, the amount owed the State in accordance 
with paragraph (a)(1) of this section, less the amounts paid under 
paragraphs (b) (1) and (2) of this section.
    (c) Administrative funding evaluation. FCSRO shall conduct data on 
the need for Program and State administrative funding within any State 
agency if the funding needs estimated in a State's management and 
administration plan are no longer accurate. Based on this data, FCS may 
make adjustments in the level of State administrative funding paid or 
payable to the State agency under paragraph (b) of this section to 
reflect changes in the size of the State's Program as compared to that 
estimated in its management and administration plan. The data shall be 
based on approved Program participation levels and shall be collected 
during the period of Program operations. As soon as possible following 
this data

[[Page 125]]

collection, payment of any additional administrative funds owed shall be 
made to the State agency. The payment may reflect adjustments made to 
the level of State administrative funding based on the information 
collected during the funding assessment. However, FCS shall not decrease 
the amount of a State's administrative funds as a result of this 
assessment unless the State failed to make reasonable efforts to 
administer the Program as proposed in its management and administration 
plan or the State incurred unnecessary expenses.
    (d) Letter of Credit for Program payments. (1) Not later than April 
15 of each fiscal year, FCS shall make available to each participating 
State in a Letter of Credit an amount equal to 65 percent of the 
preceding fiscal year's Program payments for operating costs plus 65 
percent of the preceding fiscal year's Program payments for 
administrative costs in the State. This amount may be adjusted to 
reflect changes in reimbursement rates made pursuant to 
Sec. 225.9(d)(8). However, the State shall not withdraw funds from this 
Letter of Credit until its Program management and administration plan is 
approved by FCS.
    (2) Based on the State agency's approved management and 
administration plan, FCS shall, if necessary, adjust the State's Letter 
of Credit to ensure that 65 percent of estimated current year Program 
operating and administrative funding needs is available. Such adjustment 
shall be made no later than May 15, or within 90 days of FCS receipt of 
the State agency's management and administration plan, whichever date is 
later.
    (3) Subsequent to the adjustment provided for in paragraph (d)(2) of 
this section, FCS will, if necessary, make one additional adjustment to 
ensure that the State agency's Letter of Credit contains at least 65 
percent of the Program operating and administrative funds needed during 
the current fiscal year. Such adjustment may be based on the 
administrative funding assessment provided for in paragraph (c) of this 
section, if one is conducted, or on any additional information which 
demonstrates that the funds available in the Letter of Credit do not 
equal at least 65 percent of current year Program needs. In no case will 
such adjustments be made later than September 1. Funds made available in 
the Letter of Credit shall be used by the State agency to make Program 
payments to sponsors.
    (4) The Letter of Credit shall include sufficient funds to enable 
the State agency to make advance payments to sponsors serving areas in 
which schools operate under a continuous school calendar. These funds 
shall be made available no later than the first day of the month prior 
to the month during which the food service will be conducted.
    (5) FCS shall make available any remaining Program funds due within 
45 days of the receipt of valid claims for reimbursement from sponsors 
by the State agency. However, no payment shall be made for claims 
submitted later than 60 days after the month covered by the claim unless 
an exception is granted by FCS.
    (6) Each State agency shall release to FCS any Program funds which 
it determines are unobligated as of September 30 of each fiscal year. 
Release of funds by the State agency shall be made as soon as 
practicable, but in no event later than 30 calendar days following 
demand by FCS, and shall be accomplished by an adjustment in the State 
agency's Letter of Credit.
    (e) Adjustment to Letter of Credit. Prior to May 15 of each fiscal 
year, FCS shall make any adjustments necessary in each State's Letter of 
Credit to reflect actual expenditures in the preceding fiscal year's 
Program.
    (f) Health inspection funds. If the State agency's approved 
management and administration plan estimates a need for health 
inspection funding, FCS shall make available by letter of credit an 
amount up to one percent of Program funds estimated to be needed in the 
management and administration plan. Such amount may be adjusted, based 
on the administrative funding assessment provided for in paragraph (c) 
of this section, if such assessment is conducted. Health inspection 
funds shall be used solely to enable State or local health departments 
or other governmental agencies charged with health inspection functions 
to carry

[[Page 126]]

out health inspections and meal quality tests, provided that if these 
agencies cannot perform such inspections or tests, the State agency may 
use the funds to contract with an independent agency to conduct the 
inspection or meal quality tests. Funds so provided but not expended or 
obligated shall be returned to the Department by September 30 of the 
same fiscal year.


<R05>
Sec. 225.6  State agency responsibilities.

    (a) General responsibilities. (1) The State agency shall provide 
sufficient qualified consultative, technical, and managerial personnel 
to administer the Program, monitor performance, and measure progress in 
achieving Program goals. The State agency shall assign Program 
responsibilities to personnel to ensure that all applicable requirements 
under this part are met.
    (2) By February 1 of each fiscal year, each State agency shall 
announce the purpose, eligibility criteria, and availability of the 
Program throughout the State, through appropriate means of 
communication. As part of this effort, each State agency shall identify 
rural areas, Indian tribal territories, and areas with a concentration 
of migrant farm workers which qualify for the Program and actively seek 
eligible applicant sponsors to serve such areas. State agencies shall 
identify priority outreach areas in accordance with FNA guidance and 
target outreach efforts in these areas.
    (3) Each State agency shall take the following steps to determine 
the eligibility of private nonprofit organizations to apply to sponsor 
the Program in particular areas:
    (i) By February 1 each year, compile a list of potentially eligible 
sponsors (except potential sponsors which are private nonprofit 
organizations, discussed in paragraph (a)(3)(iii) of this section) which 
have not previously participated in the Program and contact them. These 
potential sponsors shall be encouraged to use their own facilities or 
the facilities of public or nonprofit private schools for the 
preparation, delivery, and service of meals under the Program.
    (ii) By February 1 each year, when contacting the previous year's 
school food authority and governmental sponsors as required by paragraph 
(a)(3)(i) of this section, ask them to indicate in writing, no later 
than March 1, their interest in again serving as Program sponsors, in 
providing Program meals at the same sites which they served in the prior 
year, and in providing Program meals in new areas which they did not 
serve in the previous year. In addition, such entities shall be asked to 
list those sites or areas which they served in the prior year but do not 
intend to serve in the current year's Program. For each new area which 
these entities propose to serve, the school food authority or 
governmental sponsor shall describe the area's geographical boundaries 
and, whenever possible, the location and estimated dates of operation 
and daily attendance of each proposed new site. If such entities 
indicate their intention not to provide Program service at a site or in 
an area in which they sponsored the Program in the previous year, the 
State agency shall consult with the school food authority or unit of 
government to determine their reasons for discontinuing service at that 
site, and such reasons shall be accurately documented by the State 
agency;
    (iii) Analyze the information collected as a result of the efforts 
described in paragraphs (a)(3)(i) and (a)(3)(ii) of this section and 
identify areas which apparently will be unserved in the current year's 
Program. After identifying potentially unserved areas, the State agency 
shall compile a list of potentially eligible private nonprofit 
organizations and contact them to ask that they provide, no later than 
April 25, a written indication of their interest in serving as Program 
sponsors, the geographical area(s) they propose to serve, and the 
approximate number of sites which they propose to serve. For each area 
which they propose to serve, the private nonprofit organization shall 
describe the area's geographical boundaries and, whenever possible, the 
location and estimated dates of operation and daily attendance of each 
proposed site. Private nonprofit organizations shall be advised that 
they are required to use their own facilities for meal preparation or to 
obtain meals from a public facility or a

[[Page 127]]

school participating in the National School Lunch Program; and
    (iv) Analyze the information collected as a result of the efforts 
described in paragraphs (a)(3)(i)-(a)(3)(iii) of this section and, no 
later than May 1, notify private nonprofit organizations responding to 
the solicitation of interest described in paragraph (a)(3)(iii) of this 
section, of any sites which they would not be allowed to include in 
their formal application for Program sponsorships. This analysis shall 
be based upon:
    (A) The State agency's application of the priority system described 
in paragraph (b)(5) of this section; and
    (B) The ineligibility of private nonprofit organizations to sponsor 
the Program in an area where a school food authority or governmental 
sponsor had provided Program meal service during the previous 12 months. 
Such ineligibility may be waived by the State agency only if it is 
convinced (based on the contact described in paragraph (a)(3)(ii) of 
this section or, if the former sponsor did not respond, direct contact 
with the school food authority or governmental sponsor) that the school 
food authority or governmental sponsor would not have a particular area 
regardless of the potential availability of a private nonprofit 
organization to sponsor the Program in that area.
    (4) Each State agency shall require applicant sponsors submitting 
Program application site information sheets, Program agreements, or a 
request for advance payments, and sponsors submitting claims for 
reimbursement to certify that the information submitted on these forms 
is true and correct and that the sponsor is aware that deliberate 
misrepresentation or withholding of information may result in 
prosecution under applicable State and Federal statutes.
    (5) In addition to the warnings specified in paragraph (a)(4) of 
this section, applications and pre-application materials distributed to 
private nonprofit organizations shall include, in bold lettering:
    (i) The following criminal penalties and provisions established in 
section 13(o) of the National School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1761(o)):
    (A) Whoever, in connection with any application, procurement, 
recordkeeping entry, claim for reimbursement, or other document or 
statement made in connection with the Program, knowingly and willfully 
falsifies, conceals, or covers up by any trick, scheme, or device a 
material fact, or makes any false, fictitious, or fraudulent statements 
or representations, or makes or uses any false writing or document 
knowing the same to contain any false, fictitious, or fraudulent 
statement or entry, or whoever, in connection with the Program, 
knowingly makes an opportunity for any person to defraud the United 
States, or does or omits to do any act with intent to enable any person 
to defraud the United States, shall be fined not more than $10,000 or 
imprisoned not more than five years, or both.
    (B) Whoever being a partner, officer, director, or managing agent 
connected in any capacity with any partnership, association, 
corporation, business, or organization, either public or private, that 
receives benefits under the Program, knowingly or willfully embezzles, 
misapplies, steals, or obtains by fraud, false statement, or forgery, 
any benefits provided by this Program, or any money, funds, assets, or 
property derived from benefits provided by this Program, shall be fined 
not more than $10,000 or imprisoned for not more than five years, or 
both (but, if the benefits, money, funds, assets, or property involved 
is not over $200, then the penalty shall be a fine of not more than 
$1,000 or imprisonment for not more than one year, or both).
    (C) If two or more persons conspire or collude to accomplish any act 
described in paragraphs (a)(5)(i) (A) and (B) of this section, and one 
or more of such persons do any act to effect the object of the 
conspiracy or collusion, each shall be fined not more than $10,000 or 
imprisoned for not more than five years, or both.
    (ii) The procedures for termination from Program participation of 
any site or sponsor which is determined to be seriously deficient in its 
administration of the Program. In addition, the application shall also 
state that appeals of sponsor or site terminations shall follow 
procedures mandated by

[[Page 128]]

the State agency and shall also meet the minimum requirements of 7 CFR 
225.13.
    (b) Approval of sponsor applications. (1) Each State agency shall 
inform all of the previous year's sponsors which meet current 
eligibility requirements and all other potential sponsors of the 
deadline date for submitting a written application for participation in 
the Program. The State agency shall require that all applicant sponsors 
submit written applications for Program participation to the State 
agency by June 15 or, in the case of sponsors applying to administer the 
Program at academic-year NYSP sites when they did not participate in the 
previous summer's Program, by September 15. However, the State agency 
may establish an earlier deadline date for the Program application 
submission.
    (2) Each State agency shall inform potential sponsors of the 
procedure for applying for advance operating and administrative costs 
payments as provided for in Sec. 225.9(c). Where applicable, each State 
agency shall inform sponsors of the procedure for applying for start-up 
payments provided for in Sec. 225.9(a).
    (3) Within 30 days of receiving a complete and correct application, 
the State agency shall notify the applicant of its approval or 
disapproval. If an incomplete application is received, the State agency 
shall so notify the applicant within 15 days and shall provide technical 
assistance for the purpose of completing the application. Any 
disapproved applicant shall be notified of its right to appeal under 
Sec. 225.13.
    (4) The State agency shall determine the eligibility of applicant 
sponsors applying for participation in the Program in accordance with 
the applicant sponsor eligibility criteria outlined in Sec. 225.14. 
However, State agencies may approve the application of an otherwise 
eligible applicant which does not provide a year-round service to the 
community which it proposes to serve under the Program only if it meets 
one or more of the following criteria: (i) It is a residential camp; 
(ii) it proposes to provide a food service for the children of migrant 
workers; (iii) a failure to do so would deny the Program to an area in 
which poor economic conditions exist; or (iv) a significant number of 
needy children will not otherwise have reasonable access to the Program.
    (5) The State agency shall use the following order of priority in 
approving applicants to operate sites which propose to serve the same 
area or the same enrolled children:
    (i) Applicants which are public or nonprofit private school food 
authorities and other applicants which have demonstrated successful 
Program performance in a prior year;
    (ii) Applicants which propose to prepare meals at their own 
facilities or which operate only one site;
    (iii) Applicants which propose to utilize local school food service 
facilities for the preparation of meals;
    (iv) Other applicants which have demonstrated ability for successful 
Program operations;
    (v) Applicants which plan to integrate the Program with Federal, 
State, or local employment or training programs; and
    (vi) Applicants which are private nonprofit organizations.
    (6)(i) With the exception of private nonprofit organizations, the 
State agency shall not approve any applicant sponsor to operate more 
than 200 sites or to serve an average daily attendance of more than 
50,000 children unless the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction 
of the State agency that it has the capability of managing a program of 
that size.
    (ii) State agencies shall approve no applicant private nonprofit 
organization to administer more than 5 urban or 20 rural sites or to 
serve more than 2,500 children per day. In addition, no private 
nonprofit organization shall be approved to serve any site with an 
anticipated attendance of more than 300 children at any approved meal 
service at any one site. However, private nonprofit organizations may 
apply for a waiver of the limit on the number of children served at a 
site in accordance with paragraph (b)(6)(iii) of this section. In 
instances where the private nonprofit organization is approved to 
administer both rural and urban sites, it may serve a maximum of 20 
sites, of which no more than 5 many be urban.
    (iii) No applicant private nonprofit organization may apply for a 
waiver of

[[Page 129]]

the limits on the number of urban, rural, or total sites, or the total 
number of children served at each approved meal service at such sites, 
which are set forth in paragraph (b)(6)(ii) of this section. Such 
applicant private nonprofit organization may, however, apply for a 
waiver of the 300-child per site limit set forth at paragraph (b)(6)(ii) 
of this section. Such waiver application shall demonstrate to the 
satisfaction of the State agency, through the use of school food 
service, census tract, or other data, that more than 300 children are 
likely to be served at an approved meal service at a given site and that 
the sponsor is fully capable of managing a site of this size. In 
addition, State agencies shall grant such waivers only if they are 
satisfied that no other sponsor is capable of serving the children in 
excess of 300 which the applicant sponsor proposes to serve at a 
particular meal service and site. In no case may a State agency approve 
an applicant private nonprofit organization to serve more than 500 
children at any approved meal service at any one site.
    (7) The State agency shall review each applicant's administrative 
budget as a part of the application approval process in order to assess 
the applicant's ability to operate in compliance with these regulations 
within its projected reimbursement. In approving the applicant's 
administrative budget, the State agency shall take into consideration 
the number of sites and children to be served, as well as any other 
relevant factors. A sponsor's administrative budget shall be subject to 
review for adjustments by the State agency if the sponsor's level of 
site participation or the number of meals served to children changes 
significantly.
    (8) Applicants which qualify as camps shall be approved for 
reimbursement only for meals served free to enrolled children who meet 
the Program's eligibility standards.
    (9) The State agency shall not approve the application of any 
applicant sponsor identifiable through its organization or principals as 
a sponsor which has been determined to be seriously deficient as 
described in Sec. 225.11(c). However, the State agency may approve the 
application of a sponsor which has been disapproved or terminated in 
prior years in accordance with this paragraph if the applicant 
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the State agency that it has taken 
appropriate corrective actions to prevent recurrence of the 
deficiencies.
    (10) If the sponsor's application to participate is denied, the 
official making the determination of denial must notify the applicant 
sponsor in writing stating all of the grounds on which the State agency 
based the denial. Pending the outcome of a review of a denial, the State 
agency shall proceed to approve other applicants in accordance with its 
responsibilities under paragraph (b)(5) of this section, without regard 
to the application under review.
    (11) The State agency shall not approve the application of any 
applicant sponsor which submits fraudulent information or documentation 
when applying for Program participation or which knowingly withholds 
information that may lead to the disapproval of its application. 
Complete information regarding such disapproval of an applicant shall be 
submitted by the State agency through FCSRO to OIG.
    (c) Content of sponsor application. (1) The applicant shall submit a 
written application to the State agency for participation in the Program 
as a sponsor. The State agency may use the application form developed by 
FCS or it may develop an application form for use in the Program. 
Application shall be made on a timely basis in accordance with the 
deadline date established under Sec. 225.6(b)(1).
    (2) At a minimum, the application shall include:
    (i) A site information sheet, as developed by the State agency, for 
each site where a food service operation is proposed. The site 
information sheet shall demonstrate or describe the following:
    (A) An organized and supervised system for serving meals to 
attending children;
    (B) The estimated number and types of meals to be served and the 
times of service;
    (C) Arrangements, within standards prescribed by the State or local 
health authorities, for delivery and holding of

[[Page 130]]

meals until time of service, and arrangements for storing and 
refrigerating any leftover meals until the next day;
    (D) Arrangements for food service during periods of inclement 
weather;
    (E) Access to a means of communication for making necessary 
adjustments in the number of meals delivered in accordance with the 
number of children attending daily at each site;
    (F) The geographic area to be served by the site;
    (G) The percentage of children in the area to be served by the site 
who meet the Program's income standards; and
    (H) Whether the site is rural, as defined in Sec. 225.2, or non-
rural, and whether the site's food service will be self-prepared or 
vended.
    (ii) Along with its site information sheet for a site that is not a 
camp or a homeless feeding site, documentation supporting the 
eligibility of each site as serving an area in which poor economic 
conditions exist.
    (A) For those sites at which applicants will serve children of 
migrant workers, the documentation requirement may be met by providing 
the State agency with data from an organization determined by the State 
agency to be a migrant organization which supports the eligibility of 
those children as a group.
    (B) When a sponsor proposes to serve a site which it served in the 
previous year, documentation from the previous year may be used to 
support the eligibility of the site. For such sites, applicants shall 
only be required to obtain new documentation every other year.
    (iii) Along with its site information sheet for a site which is a 
camp, documentation showing the number of children enrolled in each 
session who meet the Program's income standards. If such documentation 
is not available at the time of application, it shall be submitted as 
soon as possible thereafter and in no case later than the filing of the 
camp's claim for reimbursement for each session.
    (iv) Along with its site information sheet for a homeless feeding 
site, information sufficient to demonstrate that the site is not a 
residential child care institution as defined in paragraph (c), 
definition of `school', Sec. 210.2 of the National School Lunch Program 
regulations, and that the site's primary purpose is to provide shelter 
and one or more meal services per day to homeless families. In addition, 
if cash payments, food stamps, or any in-kind service are required of 
any meal recipient at such site, sponsors shall describe the method(s) 
used to ensure that no such payments or services are received for any 
Program meal served to children.
    (v) Along with its site information sheet for NYSP sites, sponsors 
shall certify: That all of the children who will receive Program meals 
are enrolled participants in the NYSP; that no child participating in 
the NYSP during both the summer months and the academic year shall be 
required to submit more than one application to participate in the 
summer and academic-year phases of the Program; and that such 
applications shall be valid for a period commencing no earlier than May 
1 and ending no later than April 30 of the following fiscal year.
    (vi) Information in sufficient detail to enable the State agency to 
determine whether the applicant meets the criteria for participation in 
the Program as set forth in Sec. 225.14; the extent of Program payments 
needed, including a request for advance payments and start-up payments, 
if applicable; and a staffing and monitoring plan.
    (vii) A complete administrative and operating budget for State 
agency review and approval. The administrative budget shall contain the 
projected administrative expenses which a sponsor expects to incur 
during the operation of the Program, and shall include information in 
sufficient detail to enable the State agency to assess the sponsor's 
ability to operate the Program within its estimated reimbursement. A 
sponsor's approved administrative budget shall be subject to subsequent 
review by the State agency for adjustments in projected administrative 
costs.
    (viii) A plan for and a synopsis of its invitation to bid for food 
service, if an invitation to bid is required under Sec. 225.15(g).
    (ix) A free meal policy statement, as described in paragraph (c)(3) 
of this section.

[[Page 131]]

    (x) For each applicant which seeks approval under Sec. 225.14(b)(3) 
as a unit of local, municipal, county or State government, or under 
Sec. 225.14(b)(5) as a private nonprofit organization, certification 
that it will directly operate the Program in accordance with 
Sec. 225.14(d)(4).
    (3) Each applicant shall submit a statement of its policy for 
serving free meals at all sites under its jurisdiction.
    (i) The policy statement shall consist of an assurance to the State 
agency that all children are served the same meals at no separate charge 
and that there is no discrimination in the course of the food service.
    (ii) In addition, the policy statement for camps that charge 
separately for meals shall include the following:
    (A) A statement that the eligibility standards conform to the 
Secretary's family size and income standards for reduced price school 
meals;
    (B) A description of the method or methods to be used in accepting 
applications from families for Program meals. Such methods shall ensure 
that households are permitted to apply on behalf of children who are 
members of food stamp households or AFDC assistance units using the 
categorical eligibility procedures described in Sec. 225.15(f);
    (C) A description of the method used by camps for collecting 
payments from children who pay the full price of the meal while 
preventing the overt identification of children receiving a free meal;
    (D) An assurance that the camp will establish a hearing procedure 
for families wishing to appeal a denial of an application for free 
meals. Such hearing procedures shall meet the requirements set forth in 
paragraph (c)(4) of this section;
    (E) An assurance that, if a family requests a hearing, the child 
shall continue to receive free meals until a decision is rendered; and
    (F) An assurance that there will be no overt identification of free 
meal recipients and no discrimination against any child on the basis of 
race, color, national origin, sex, age, or handicap.
    (4) Each applicant that is a camp shall submit with its application 
a copy of its hearing procedures. At a minimum, these procedures shall 
provide:
    (i) That a simple, publicly announced method will be used for a 
family to make an oral or written request for a hearing;
    (ii) That the family will have the opportunity to be assisted or 
represented by an attorney or other person;
    (iii) That the family will have an opportunity to examine the 
documents and records supporting the decision being appealed both before 
and during the hearing;
    (iv) That the hearing will be reasonably prompt and convenient for 
the family;
    (v) That adequate notice will be given to the family of the time and 
place of the hearing;
    (vi) That the family will have an opportunity to present oral or 
documentary evidence and arguments supporting its position;
    (vii) That the family will have an opportunity to question or refute 
any testimony or other evidence and to confront and cross-examine any 
adverse witnesses;
    (viii) That the hearing shall be conducted and the decision made by 
a hearing official who did not participate in the action being appealed;
    (ix) That the decision shall be based on the oral and documentary 
evidence presented at the hearing and made a part of the record;
    (x) That the family and any designated representative shall be 
notified in writing of the decision;
    (xi) That a written record shall be prepared for each hearing which 
includes the action being appealed, any documentary evidence and a 
summary of oral testimony presented at the hearing, the decision and the 
reasons for the decision, and a copy of the notice sent to the family; 
and
    (xii) That the written record shall be maintained for a period of 
three years following the conclusion of the hearing, during which it 
shall be available for examination by the family or its representatives 
at any reasonable time and place.
    (d) Approval of sites. (1) When evaluating a proposed food service 
site, the State agency shall ensure that:

[[Page 132]]

    (i) If not a camp, or a homeless feeding site, the proposed site 
serves an area in which poor economic conditions exist, as defined by 
Sec. 225.2;
    (ii) The area which the site proposes to serve is not or will not be 
served in whole or in part by another site, unless it can be 
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the State agency that each site will 
serve children not served by any other site in the same area for the 
same meal; and
    (iii) The site is approved to serve no more than the number of 
children for which its facilities are adequate.
    (2) When approving the application of a site which will serve meals 
prepared by a food service management company, the State agency shall 
establish for each meal service an approved level for the maximum number 
of children's meals which may be served under the Program. These 
approved levels shall be established in accordance with the following 
provisions:
    (i) The initial maximum approved level shall be based upon the 
historical record of attendance at the site if such a record has been 
established in prior years and the State agency determines that it is 
accurate. The State agency shall develop a procedure for establishing 
initial maximum approved levels for sites when no accurate record from 
prior years is available.
    (ii) The maximum approved level shall be adjusted, if warranted, 
based upon information collected during site reviews. If attendance at 
the site on the day of the review is significantly below the site's 
approved level, the State agency should consider making a downward 
adjustment in the approved level with the objective of providing only 
one meal per child.
    (iii) The sponsor may seek an upward adjustment in the approved 
level for its sites by requesting a site review or by providing the 
State agency with evidence that attendance exceeds the sites' approved 
levels.
    (iv) Whenever the State agency establishes or adjusts approved 
levels of meal service for a site, it shall document the action in its 
files, and it shall provide the sponsor with immediate written 
confirmation of the approved level.
    (v) Upon approval of its application or any adjustment to its 
maximum approved levels, the sponsor shall inform the food service 
management company with which it contracts of the approved level for 
each meal service at each site served by the food service management 
company. This notification of any adjustments in approved levels shall 
take place within the time frames set forth in the contract for 
adjusting meal orders. Whenever the sponsor notifies the food service 
management company of the approved levels or any adjustments to these 
levels for any of its sites, the sponsor shall clearly inform the food 
service management company that an approved level of meal service 
represents the maximum number of meals which may be served at a site and 
is not a standing order for a specific number of meals at that site. 
When the number of children attending is below the site's approved 
level, the sponsor shall adjust meal orders with the objective of 
serving only one meal per child as required under Sec. 225.15(b)(3).
    (e) State-Sponsor Agreement. Sponsors approved for participation in 
the Program shall enter into written agreements with the State agency. 
The agreements shall provide that the sponsor shall:
    (1) Operate a nonprofit food service during any period from May 
through September for children on school vacation; or, at any time of 
the year, in the case of sponsors administering the Program under a 
continuous school calendar system; or during the period from October 
through April under the academic-year NYSP. Sponsors participating in 
both the summer and academic-year phases of the NYSP shall be required 
to enter into one agreement with the State agency which shall be valid 
for a 12-month period commencing no earlier than May 1 and ending no 
later than April 30 of the following fiscal year;
    (2) Serve meals which meet the requirements and provisions set forth 
in Sec. 225.16 during times designated as meal service periods by the 
sponsor, and serve the same meals to all children;
    (3) Serve meals without cost to all children, except that camps may 
charge for meals served to children

[[Page 133]]

who are not served meals under the Program;
    (4) Issue a free meal policy statement in accordance with 
Sec. 225.6(c);
    (5) Meet the training requirement for its administrative and site 
personnel, as required under Sec. 225.15(d)(1);
    (6) Claim reimbursement only for the type or types of meals 
specified in the agreement and served without charge to children at 
approved sites during the approved meal service period, except that 
camps shall claim reimbursement only for the type or types of meals 
specified in the agreement and served without charge to children who 
meet the Program's income standards. The agreement shall specify the 
approved levels of meal service for the sponsor's sites if such levels 
are required under Sec. 225.6(d)(2). No permanent changes may be made in 
the serving time of any meal unless the changes are approved by the 
State agency;
    (7) Submit claims for reimbursement in accordance with procedures 
established by the State agency, and those stated in Sec. 225.9;
    (8) In the storage, preparation and service of food, maintain proper 
sanitation and health standards in conformance with all applicable State 
and local laws and regulations;
    (9) Accept and use, in quantities that may be efficiently utilized 
in the Program, such foods as may be offered as a donation by the 
Department;
    (10) Have access to facilities necessary for storing, preparing, and 
serving food;
    (11) Maintain a financial management system as prescribed by the 
State agency;
    (12) Maintain on file documentation of site visits and reviews in 
accordance with Sec. 225.15(d) (2) and (3);
    (13) Upon request, make all accounts and records pertaining to the 
Program available to State, Federal, or other authorized officials for 
audit or administrative review, at a reasonable time and place. The 
records shall be retained for a period of 3 years after the end of the 
fiscal year to which they pertain, unless audit or investigative 
findings have not been resolved, in which case the records shall be 
retained until all issues raised by the audit or investigation have been 
resolved;
    (14) Maintain children on site while meals are consumed; and
    (15) Retain final financial and administrative responsibility for 
its program.
    (f) Special Account. In addition, the State agency may require any 
vended sponsor to enter into a special account agreement with the State 
agency. The special account agreement shall stipulate that the sponsor 
shall establish a special account with a State agency or Federally 
insured bank for operating costs payable to the sponsor by the State. 
The agreement shall also stipulate that any disbursement of monies from 
the account must be authorized by both the sponsor and the food service 
management company. The special account agreement may contain such other 
terms, agreed to by both the sponsor and the food service management 
company, which are consistent with the terms of the contract between the 
sponsor and the food service management company. A copy of the special 
account agreement shall be submitted to the State agency and another 
copy maintained on file by the sponsor. Any charges made by the bank for 
the account described in this section shall be considered an allowable 
sponsor administrative cost.
    (g) Food service management company registration. (1) With the 
exception of the exemptions described in paragraph (g)(9) of this 
section, each food service management company shall register with the 
State by March 15 of each fiscal year. A State agency shall consider a 
food service management company's application for registration submitted 
after March 15 of the current year only if the State agency determines 
and documents that failing to consider the company's application could 
potentially result in a significant number of needy children not having 
reasonable access to the Program.
    (2) By February 1, each State agency shall notify each food service 
management company which participated in the State's Program during the 
previous two years that it must register with the State agency. This 
notification shall include, at a minimum:
    (i) A statement that registration with the State agency is a 
prerequisite to participation in the Program;

[[Page 134]]

    (ii) A list of the items which must be submitted with the 
application for registration as set forth in paragraph (g)(4) of this 
section;
    (iii) A complete description of the criteria developed by the State 
agency for determining registrant eligibility; and
    (iv) Any other information necessary to apply for registration.
In addition, each State agency shall by February 1 issue a public 
announcement of the registration requirement, including all the 
information necessary to apply for registration.
    (3) Each State agency shall require food service management 
companies submitting applications for registration to certify that the 
information submitted is true and correct and that the food service 
management company is aware that misrepresentation may result in 
prosecution under applicable State and Federal statutes.
    (4) At a minimum registration shall require:
    (i) Submission of the food service management company's name and 
mailing address and any other names under which the company has operated 
during the past two years;
    (ii) A certification that the food service management company meets 
applicable State and local health, safety, and sanitation standards;
    (iii) Disclosure of present company owners, directors, and officers, 
and their relationship in the past two years to any sponsor or food 
service management company which participated in the Program;
    (iv) Records of contract terminations, disallowances, and health, 
safety, and sanitation code violations related to Program participation 
during the past two years;
    (v) Records of any other contract terminations and health, safety, 
and sanitation code violations during the past two years;
    (vi) The address or addresses of the company's food preparation and 
distribution facilities which will be used in the Program and the name 
of the local official responsible for the operation of these facilities;
    (vii) The number of Program meals which can be prepared in each 
preparation facility during a twenty-four hour period;
    (viii) A certification that the food service management company will 
operate in accordance with current Program regulations;
    (ix) A statement that the food service management company 
understands that it will not be paid for meals which are delivered to 
non-approved sites, or for meals which are delivered to approved sites 
outside of the agreed upon delivery time, or for meals that do not meet 
the meal requirements and food specifications contained in the contract 
between the sponsor and the food service management company;
    (x) Submission of a Certified Public Accountant's audit report if an 
audit was performed during the prior year; and
    (xi) A statement as to whether the organization is a minority 
business enterprise. A minority business enterprise is a business in 
which:
    (A) The management and daily operations of the business are 
controlled by a member or members of a minority group (minority groups 
are Blacks, Hispanics, American Indians, Alaskan Natives, Orientals and 
Aleuts); and
    (B) At least 51 percent of which is owned by a member or members of 
a minority group. If the business is a corporation, at least 51 percent 
of all classes of voting stock of the corporation must be owned by 
members of a minority group; if the business is a partnership, at least 
51 percent of the partnership must be owned by a member or members of a 
minority group.
    (5) Prior to approving a food service management company's request 
for registration, the State agency shall provide for inspection of all 
food preparation facilities listed on the application for registration, 
except those located outside the State. The State agency shall promptly 
notify FCSRO of the name and location of any out-of-State facility, and 
FCSRO shall ensure that the facility is inspected prior to registration. 
The purpose of the inspection is to evaluate each facility's suitability 
for preparation of Program meals. The State agency may waive this 
inspection requirement if a facility was registered during the previous

[[Page 135]]

summer and operated in accordance with Program requirements.
    (6) No food service management company shall be registered if the 
State agency determines that the company lacks the administrative and 
financial capability to perform under the Program or if it is 
identifiable through its organization or principals as a food service 
management company which participated in the Program during any previous 
year and was seriously deficient in its Program operation. Serious 
deficiencies which are grounds for non-registration include, but are not 
limited to, any of the following:
    (i) Noncompliance with the applicable bid procedures, contract 
requirements, or Program regulations;
    (ii) Submission of false information to the State agency;
    (iii) Failure to conform meal deliveries to meal orders;
    (iv) Delivery of a significant number of meals which did not meet 
contract requirements;
    (v) Failure to maintain adequate records;
    (vi) Significant health code violations which were not corrected 
upon reinspection;
    (vii) Failure to deliver meals; or
    (viii) The conviction of any officer, owner, partner, or manager of 
the company for a crime in connection with the prior Program operation.
    (7) The State agency shall notify in writing each food service 
management company which applied for registration of its determination 
within 30 calendar days of receiving the complete application. If the 
application for registration is denied, the official making the 
determination must notify the food service management company in 
writing, stating all the grounds on which the State agency based the 
denial.
    (8) Each State agency shall submit information to FCS regarding 
registration of food service management companies, as required under 
Sec. 225.8(d).
    (9) The following types of food service management companies are 
exempt from the requirement for registration: (i) A school or school 
food authority acting as a food service management company; and (ii) a 
food service management company which has an exclusive contract with a 
school or school food authority for year-round service and has no 
contracts with other Program sponsors.
    (h) Monitoring of food service management company procurements. (1) 
The State agency shall ensure that sponsors' food service management 
company procurements are carried out in accordance with Secs. 225.15(g) 
and 225.17 of this part.
    (2) Each State agency shall develop a standard form of contract for 
use by sponsors in contracting with food service management companies. 
Sponsors which are public entities, sponsors with exclusive year-round 
contracts with a food service management company, and sponsors whose 
food service management company contract(s) do not exceed $10,000 in 
aggregate value may use their existing or usual form of contract, 
provided that such form of contract has been submitted to and approved 
by the State agency. The standard contract developed by the State agency 
shall expressly and without exception provide that:
    (i) All meals prepared by a food service management company shall be 
unitized, with or without milk or juice, unless the State agency has 
approved, pursuant to paragraph (h)(3) of this section, a request for 
exceptions to the unitizing requirement for certain components of a 
meal;
    (ii) A food service management company entering into a contract with 
a sponsor under the Program shall not subcontract for the total meal, 
with or without milk, or for the assembly of the meal;
    (iii) The sponsor shall provide to the food service management 
company a list of State agency approved food service sites, along with 
the approved level for the number of meals which may be claimed for 
reimbursement for each site, established under Sec. 225.6(d)(2), and 
shall notify the food service management company of all sites which have 
been approved, cancelled, or terminated subsequent to the submission of 
the initial approved site list and of any changes in the approved level 
of meal service for a site. Such notification shall be provided within 
the time limits mutually agreed upon in the contract;

[[Page 136]]

    (iv) The food service management company shall maintain such records 
(supported by invoices, receipts, or other evidence) as the sponsor will 
need to meet its responsibilities under this part, and shall submit all 
required reports to the sponsor promptly at the end of each month, 
unless more frequent reports are required by the sponsor;
    (v) The food service management company shall have State or local 
health certification for the facility in which it proposes to prepare 
meals for use in the Program, and it shall ensure that health and 
sanitation requirements are met at all times. In addition, the food 
service management company shall provide for meals which it prepares to 
be periodically inspected by the local health department or an 
independent agency to determine bacteria levels in the meals being 
served. These levels shall conform to the standards which are applied by 
the local health authority with respect to the level of bacteria which 
may be present in meals served by other food service establishments in 
the locality. The results of the inspections shall be submitted promptly 
to the sponsor and to the State agency;
    (vi) The meals served under the contract shall conform to the cycle 
menus and meal quality standards and food specifications approved by the 
State agency and upon which the bid was based;
    (vii) The books and records of the food service management company 
pertaining to the sponsor's food service operation shall be available 
for inspection and audit by representatives of the State agency, the 
Department and the U.S. General Accounting Office at any reasonable time 
and place for a period of 3 years from the date of receipt of final 
payment under the contract, except that, if audit or investigation 
findings have not been resolved, such records shall be retained until 
all issues raised by the audit or investigation have been resolved;
    (viii) The sponsor and the food service management company shall 
operate in accordance with current Program regulations;
    (ix) The food service management company shall be paid by the 
sponsor for all meals delivered in accordance with the contract and this 
part. However, neither the Department nor the State agency assumes any 
liability for payment of differences between the number of meals 
delivered by the food service management company and the number of meals 
served by the sponsor that are eligible for reimbursement;
    (x) Meals shall be delivered in accordance with a delivery schedule 
prescribed in the contract;
    (xi) Increases and decreases in the number of meals ordered shall be 
made by the sponsor, as needed, within a prior notice period mutually 
agreed upon;
    (xii) All meals served under the Program shall meet the requirements 
of Sec. 225.16;
    (xiii) In cases of nonperformance or noncompliance on the part of 
the food service management company, the company shall pay the sponsor 
for any excess costs which the sponsor may incur by obtaining meals from 
another source;
    (xiv) If the State agency requires the sponsor to establish a 
special account for the deposit of operating costs payments in 
accordance with the conditions set forth in Sec. 225.6(f), the contract 
shall so specify;
    (xv) The food service management company shall submit records of all 
costs incurred in the sponsor's food service operation in sufficient 
time to allow the sponsor to prepare and submit the claim for 
reimbursement to meet the 60-day submission deadline; and
    (xvi) The food service management company shall comply with the 
appropriate bonding requirements, as set forth in Sec. 225.15(g) (6)-
(8).
    (3) All meals prepared by a food service management company shall be 
unitized, with or without milk or juice, unless the sponsor submits to 
the State agency a request for exceptions to the unitizing requirement 
for certain components of a meal. These requests shall be submitted to 
the State agency in writing in sufficient time for the State agency to 
respond prior to the sponsor's advertising for bids. The State agency 
shall notify the sponsor in writing of its determination in a timely 
manner.

[[Page 137]]

    (4) Each State agency shall have a representative present at all 
food service management company procurement bid openings when sponsors 
are expected to receive more than $100,000 in Program payments.
    (5) Copies of all contracts between sponsors and food service 
management companies, along with a certification of independent price 
determination, shall be submitted to the State agency prior to the 
beginning of Program operations. Sponsors shall also submit to the State 
agency copies of all bids received and their reason for selecting the 
food service management company chosen.
    (6) All bids in an amount which exceeds the lowest bid shall be 
submitted to the State agency for approval before acceptance. All bids 
totaling $100,000 or more shall be submitted to the State agency for 
approval before acceptance. State agencies shall respond to a request 
for approval of such bids within 5 working days of receipt.
    (7) Failure by a sponsor to comply with the provisions of this 
paragraph or Sec. 225.15(g)(1) shall be sufficient grounds for the State 
agency to terminate participation by the sponsor in accordance with 
Sec. 225.18(b).
    (i) Meal pattern exceptions. The State agency shall review and act 
upon requests for exceptions to the meal pattern in accordance with the 
guidelines and limitations set forth in Sec. 225.16.

[54 FR 18208, Apr. 27, 1989, as amended at 55 FR 13467, Apr. 10, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 225.7  Program monitoring and assistance.

    (a) Training. Prior to the beginning of Program operations, each 
State agency shall make available training in all necessary areas of 
Program administration to sponsor personnel, food service management 
company representatives, auditors, and health inspectors who will 
participate in the Program in that State. Prior to Program operations, 
the State agency shall ensure that the sponsor's supervisory personnel 
responsible for the food service receive training in all necessary areas 
of Program administration and operations. This training shall reflect 
the fact that individual sponsors or groups of sponsors require 
different levels and areas of Program training. State agencies are 
encouraged to utilize in such training, and in the training of site 
personnel, sponsor personnel who have previously participated in the 
Program. Training should be made available at convenient locations. In 
the training of private nonprofit organizations, State agencies shall 
give special emphasis to proper meal counting techniques, meal pattern 
requirements, free and reduced price application requirements, 
restrictions on second meal service, the prohibition on off-site meal 
consumption, timely and accurate claims submission, and recordkeeping.
    (b) Program materials. Each State agency shall develop and make 
available all necessary Program materials in sufficient time to enable 
applicant sponsors to prepare adequately for the Program.
    (c) Food specifications and meal quality standards. With the 
assistance of the Department, each State agency shall develop and make 
available to all sponsors minimum food specifications and model meal 
quality standards which shall become part of all contracts between 
vended sponsors and food service management companies.
    (d) Program monitoring and assistance. The State agency shall 
conduct Program monitoring and provide Program assistance according to 
the following provisions:
    (1) Pre-approval visits. The State agency shall conduct pre-approval 
visits of sponsors and sites, as specified below, to assess the 
applicant sponsor's or site's potential for successful Program 
operations and to verify information provided in the application. The 
State agency shall visit prior to approval:
    (i) All applicant sponsors which did not participate in the program 
in the prior year. However, if a sponsor is a school food authority, has 
been reviewed by the State agency under the National School Lunch 
Program during the preceding 12 months, and had no significant 
deficiencies noted in that review, a pre-approval visit may be conducted 
at the discretion of the State agency;
    (ii) All applicant sponsors which, as a result of operational 
problems noted in the prior year, the State agency has

[[Page 138]]

determined need a pre-approval visit; and
    (iii) With the exception of sites administered by private nonprofit 
organizations, all proposed nonschool sites with an expected average 
daily attendance of 300 children or more which did not participate in 
the Program in the prior year.
    (iv) In the case of private nonprofit organizations, all proposed 
sites with an expected attendance at an approved meal service of 100 
children or more which did not participate in the Program in the prior 
year.
    (2) Sponsor and site reviews. The State agency shall review sponsors 
and sites to ensure compliance with Program regulations, the 
Department's nondiscrimination regulations (7 CFR part 15) and any other 
applicable instructions issued by the Department. In determining which 
sponsors and sites to review under this paragraph, the State agency 
shall, at a minimum, consider the sponsors' and sites' previous 
participation in the Program, their current and previous Program 
performance, and the results of any previous reviews of the sponsor and 
sites. Reviews shall be conducted as follows:
    (i) State agencies conduct both a review of sponsor operations and 
review an average of 15 percent of the following sponsors' sites (with a 
minimum of one site reviewed per sponsor) during the first four weeks of 
operation:
    (A) Private nonprofit organizations which administer only urban 
sites, when such sponsors did not participate in the prior year's SFSP 
and administer three or more urban sites;
    (B) Other private nonprofit organizations which are determined by 
the State agency to need early reviews;
    (C) Any sponsors, including private nonprofit organizations, which 
have 10 or more sites and which did not operate the Program in the prior 
year; and
    (D) Other sponsors of 10 or more sites which are determined by the 
State agency to need early reviews.
    (ii) Beginning in Fiscal Year 1991, State agencies shall conduct a 
review of academic-year NYSP sponsors, and at least one of their sites, 
during the period October through April.
    (iii) In addition to the reviews specified in paragraphs (d)(2)(i) 
and (d)(2)(ii) of this section, the State agency shall also conduct the 
following reviews (with a minimum of one site reviewed per sponsor) at 
least once during the Program:
    (A) For all remaining sponsors with 10 or more sites, an average of 
at least 15 percent of their sites; and
    (B) For 70 percent of sponsors with fewer than 10 sites, an average 
of at least 10 percent of their sites.
    (3) Follow-up reviews. The State agency shall conduct follow-up 
reviews of sponsors and sites as necessary.
    (4) Monitoring system. Each State agency shall develop and implement 
a monitoring system to ensure that sponsors, including site personnel, 
and the sponsor's food service management company, if applicable, 
immediately receive a copy of any review reports which indicate Program 
violations and which could result in a Program disallowance.
    (5) Records. Documentation of Program assistance and the results of 
such assistance shall be maintained on file by the State agency.
    (6) Food service management company facility visits. As a part of 
the review of any vended sponsor which contracts for the preparation of 
meals, the State agency shall inspect the food service management 
company's facilities. Each State agency shall establish an order of 
priority for visiting facilities at which food is prepared for the 
Program. The State agency shall respond promptly to complaints 
concerning facilities. If a food service management company fails to 
correct violations noted by the State agency during a review, the State 
agency shall notify the sponsor and the food service management company 
that reimbursement shall not be paid for meals prepared by the food 
service management company after a date specified in the notification. 
Funds provided for in Sec. 225.5(f) may be used for conducting food 
service management company facility inspections.
    (7) Forms for reviews by sponsors. Each State agency shall develop 
and provide monitor review forms to all approved sponsors. These forms 
shall be completed by sponsor monitors. The monitor review form shall 
include, but not

[[Page 139]]

be limited to, the time of the reviewer's arrival and departure, the 
site supervisor's signature, a certification statement to be signed by 
the monitor, the number of meals prepared or delivered, the number of 
meals served to children, the deficiencies noted, the corrective actions 
taken by the sponsor, and the date of such actions.
    (8) Statistical monitoring. State agencies may use statistical 
monitoring procedures in lieu of the site monitoring requirements 
prescribed in paragraph (d)(2) of this section to accomplish the 
monitoring and technical assistance aspects of the Program. State 
agencies which use statistical monitoring procedures may use the 
findings in evaluating claims for reimbursement. Statistical monitoring 
may be used for some or all of a State's sponsors. Use of statistical 
monitoring does not eliminate the requirements for reviewing sponsors as 
specified in paragraph (d)(2) of this section.
    (9) Corrective actions. Corrective actions which the State agency 
may take when Program violations are observed during the conduct of a 
review are discussed in Sec. 225.11. The State agency shall conduct 
follow-up reviews as appropriate when corrective actions are required.
    (e) Other facility inspections and meal quality tests. In addition 
to those inspections required by paragraph (d)(6) of this section, the 
State agency may also conduct, or arrange to have conducted: inspections 
of self-preparation and vended sponsors' food preparation facilities; 
inspections of food service sites; and meal quality tests. The 
procedures for carrying out these inspections and tests shall be 
consistent with procedures used by local health authorities. For 
inspections of food service management companies' facilities not 
conducted by State agency personnel, copies of the results shall be 
provided to the State agency. The company and the sponsor shall also 
immediately receive a copy of the results of these inspections when 
corrective action is required. If a food service management company 
fails to correct violations noted by the State agency during a review, 
the State agency shall notify the sponsor and the food service 
management company that reimbursement shall not be paid for meals 
prepared by the food service management company after a date specified 
in the notification. Funds provided for in Sec. 225.5(f) may be used for 
conducting these inspections and tests.
    (f) Financial management. Each State agency shall establish a 
financial management system, in accordance with the Department's Uniform 
Financial Assistance Regulations (7 CFR part 3015) and FCS guidance, to 
identify allowable Program costs and to establish standards for sponsor 
recordkeeping and reporting. The State agency shall provide guidance on 
these financial management standards to each sponsor.
    (g) Nondiscrimination. (1) Each State agency shall comply with all 
requirements of title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, title IX of 
the Education Amendments of 1972, section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act 
of 1973, the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, and the Department's 
regulations concerning nondiscrimination (7 CFR parts 15, 15a and 15b), 
including requirements for racial and ethnic participation data 
collection, public notification of the nondiscrimination policy, and 
reviews to assure compliance with such policy, to the end that no person 
shall, on the grounds of race, color, national origin, sex, age, or 
handicap, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, 
or be otherwise subjected to discrimination under, the Program.
    (2) Complaints of discrimination filed by applicants or participants 
shall be referred to FCS or the Secretary of Agriculture, Washington, DC 
20250. A State agency which has an established grievance or complaint 
handling procedure may resolve sex and handicap discrimination 
complaints before referring a report to FCS.

[54 FR 18208, Apr. 27, 1989, as amended at 55 FR 13468, Apr. 10, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 225.8  Records and reports.

    (a) Each State agency shall maintain complete and accurate current 
accounting records of its Program operations which will adequately 
identify funds authorizations, obligations, unobligated balances, 
assets, liabilities,

[[Page 140]]

income, claims against sponsors and efforts to recover overpayments, and 
expenditures for administrative and operating costs. These records shall 
be retained for a period of three years after the date of the submission 
of the final Program Operations and Financial Status Report (SF-269), 
except that, if audit findings have not been resolved, the affected 
records shall be retained beyond the three year period until such time 
as any issues raised by the audit findings have been resolved. The State 
agency shall also retain a complete record of each review or appeal 
conducted, as required under Sec. 225.13, for a period of three years 
following the date of the final determination on the review or appeal. 
Records may be kept in their original form or on microfilm.
    (b) Each State agency shall submit to FCS a final report on the 
Summer Food Service Program Operations (FCS-418) for each month no more 
than 90 days following the last day of the month covered by the report. 
States shall not receive Program funds for any month for which the final 
report is not postmarked and/or submitted within this time limit unless 
FCS grants an exception. Upward adjustments to a State's report shall 
not be made after 90 days from the month covered by the report unless 
authorized by FCS. Downward adjustments shall always be made without FCS 
authorization, regardless of when it is determined that such adjustments 
need to be made. Adjustments to a State's report shall be reported to 
FCS in accordance with procedures established by FCS. Each State agency 
shall also submit to FCS a quarterly Financial Status Report (SF-269) on 
the use of Program funds. Such reports shall be submitted no later than 
30 days after the end of each fiscal year quarter. Obligations shall be 
reported only for the fiscal year in which they occur. Action may be 
taken against the State agency, in accordance with Sec. 225.5(a)(1), for 
failure to submit accurate and timely reports.
    (c) The State agency must submit to FCS a final Financial Status 
Report no later than 120 days after the end of the fiscal year, on a 
form (SF-269) provided by FCS. Any requested increase in reimbursement 
levels for a fiscal year resulting from corrective action taken after 
submission of the final Program Operations and Financial Status Reports 
shall be submitted to FCS for approval. The request shall be accompanied 
by a written explanation of the basis for the adjustment and the actions 
taken to minimize the need for such adjustments in the future. If FCS 
approves such an increase, it will make payment, subject to availability 
of funds. Any reduction in reimbursement for that fiscal year resulting 
from corrective action taken after submission of the final fiscal year 
Program Operations and Financial Status Reports shall be handled in 
accordance with the provisions of Sec. 225.12(d), except that amounts 
recovered may not be used to make Program payments.
    (d) By October 15, each State agency shall submit to FCS, on a form 
provided by FCS, information concerning each food service management 
company which applied to the State agency for registration for that 
calendar year's Program. This information shall be made available to 
State agencies upon request in order to ensure that only qualified food 
service management companies contract for services in all States. FCS 
shall allow any food service management company to review the 
information concerning that company which was submitted to FCS in 
accordance with this paragraph.
    (e) No later than May 1 of each year, State agencies shall submit to 
the appropriate FCSRO a list of names and addresses of each potential 
private nonprofit organization, the geographical area(s) which such 
potential sponsors propose to serve, the approximate number of sites 
which they propose to serve and, whenever possible, the location and 
estimated dates of operation and daily attendance of each proposed site. 
Such listing shall be based on the information gathered and analyzed in 
accordance with Sec. 225.6(a)(3) of this part. In addition, within five 
working days of approving a private nonprofit organization to 
participate in the Program, State agencies shall notify FCS of such 
approval and shall provide updated information for each of the private 
nonprofit organization's approved sites regarding the sites' locations, 
dates of operation, and estimated daily attendance; the duration, 
number, and

[[Page 141]]

type(s) of approved meal service at each site; and whether the site is 
rural or urban, vended or self-preparation, enrolled or open, or is a 
homeless feeding site.

[54 FR 18208, Apr. 27, 1989, as amended at 55 FR 13469, Apr. 10, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 225.9  Program assistance to sponsors.

    (a) Start-up payments. At their discretion, State agencies may make 
start-up payments to sponsors which have executed Program agreements. 
Start-up payments shall not be made more than two months before the 
sponsor is scheduled to begin food service operations and shall not 
exceed 20 percent of the sponsor's approved administrative budget. The 
amount of the start-up payment shall be deducted from the first advance 
payment for administrative costs or, if the sponsor does not receive 
advance payments, from the first administrative reimbursement.
    (b) Commodity assistance. (1) Sponsors eligible to receive 
commodities under the Program include: Self-preparation sponsors; 
sponsors which have entered into an agreement with a school or school 
food authority for the preparation of meals; and sponsors which are 
school food authorities and have competitively procured Program meals 
from the same food service management company from which they 
competitively procured meals for the National School Lunch Program 
during the last period in which school was in session. The State agency 
shall make available to these sponsors information on available 
commodities. Sponsors shall use in the Program food donated by the 
Department and accepted by sponsors.
    (2) Not later than June 1 of each year, State agencies shall prepare 
a list of the sponsors which are eligible to receive commodities and the 
average daily number of eligible meals to be served by each of these 
sponsors. If the State agency does not handle the distribution of 
commodities donated by the Department, this list shall be forwarded to 
the agency of the State responsible for the distribution of commodities. 
The State agency shall be responsible for promptly revising the list to 
reflect additions or terminations of sponsors and for adjusting the 
average daily participation data as it deems necessary.
    (c) Advance payments. At the sponsor's request, State agencies shall 
make advance payments to sponsors which have executed Program agreements 
in order to assist these sponsors in meeting operating costs and 
administrative expenses. For sponsors operating under a continuous 
school calendar, all advance payments shall be forwarded on the first 
day of each month of operation. Advance payments shall be made by the 
dates specified in paragraphs (c) (1) and (2) of this section for all 
other sponsors whose requests are received at least 30 days prior to 
those dates. Requests received less than 30 days prior to those dates 
shall be acted upon within 30 days of receipt. When making advance 
payments, State agencies shall observe the following criteria:
    (1) Operating costs. (i) State agencies shall make advance payments 
for operating costs by June 1, July 15, and August 15. To be eligible 
for the second advance payment, the sponsor must have conducted training 
sessions covering Program duties and responsibilities for its own 
personnel and for site personnel. A sponsor shall not receive advance 
operating cost payments for any month in which it will participate in 
the Program for less than ten days.
    (ii) To determine the amount of the advance payment to any sponsor, 
the State agency shall employ whichever of the following methods will 
result in the larger payment:
    (A) The total operating costs paid to the sponsor for the same 
calendar month in the preceding year; or
    (B) For vended sponsors, 50 percent of the amount determined by the 
State agency to be needed that month for meals, and, for self-
preparation sponsors, 65 percent of the amount determined by the State 
agency to be needed that month for meals.
    (2) Administrative costs. (i) State agencies shall make advance 
payments for administrative costs by June 1 and July 15. To be eligible 
for the second advance payment, the sponsor must certify that it is 
operating the number of sites for which the administrative

[[Page 142]]

budget was approved and that its projected administrative costs do not 
differ significantly from the approved budget. A sponsor shall not 
receive advance administrative costs payments for any month in which it 
will participate in the Program for less than 10 days. However, if a 
sponsor operates for less than 10 days in June but for at least 10 days 
in August, the second advance administrative costs payment shall be made 
by August 15.
    (ii) Each payment shall equal one-third of the total amount which 
the State agency determines the sponsor will need to administer its 
program. For sponsors which will operate for 10 or more days in only one 
month and, therefore, will qualify for only one advance administrative 
costs payment, the payment shall be no less than one-half, and no more 
than two-thirds, of the total amount which the State agency determines 
the sponsor will need to administer its program.
    (3) Advance payment estimates. When determining the amount of 
advance payments payable to the sponsor, the State agency shall make the 
best possible estimate based on the sponsor's request and any other 
available data. Under no circumstances may the amount of the advance 
payment for operating or administrative costs exceed the amount 
estimated by the State agency to be needed by the sponsor to meet 
operating or administrative costs, respectively.
    (4) Limit. The sum of the advance operating and administrative costs 
payments to a sponsor for any one month shall not exceed $40,000 unless 
the State agency determines that a larger payment is necessary for the 
effective operation of the Program and the sponsor demonstrates 
sufficient administrative and managerial capability to justify a larger 
payment.
    (5) Deductions from advance payments. The State agency shall deduct 
from either advance operating payments or advance administrative 
payments the amount of any previous payment which is under dispute or 
which is part of a demand for recovery under Sec. 225.12.
    (6) Withholding of advance payments. If the State agency has reason 
to believe that a sponsor will not be able to submit a valid claim for 
reimbursement covering the month for which advance payments have already 
been made, the subsequent month's advance payment shall be withheld 
until a valid claim is received.
    (7) Repayment of excess advance payments. Upon demand of the State 
agency, sponsors shall repay any advance Program payments in excess of 
the amount cited on a valid claim for reimbursement.
    (d) Reimbursements. Sponsors shall not be eligible for 
reimbursements for operating and administrative costs unless they have 
executed an agreement with the State agency. All reimbursements shall be 
in accordance with the terms of this agreement. Reimbursements shall not 
be paid for meals served at a site before the sponsor has received 
written notification that the site has been approved for participation 
in the Program. Income accruing to a sponsor's program shall be deducted 
from combined operating and administrative costs. The State agency may 
make full or partial reimbursement upon receipt of a claim for 
reimbursement, but shall first make any necessary adjustments in the 
amount to be paid. The following requirements shall be observed in 
submitting and paying claims:
    (1) No reimbursement may be issued until the sponsor certifies that 
it operated all sites for which it is approved and that there has been 
no significant change in its projected administrative costs since its 
preceding claim and, for a sponsor receiving an advance payment for only 
one month, that there has been no significant change in its projected 
administrative costs since its initial advance administrative costs 
payment.
    (2) Sponsors which operate less than 10 days in the final month of 
operations shall submit a combined claim for the final month and the 
immediate preceding month within 60 days of the last day of operation.
    (3) The State agency shall forward reimbursements within 45 days of 
receiving valid claims. If a claim is incomplete or invalid, the State 
agency shall return the claim to the sponsor within

[[Page 143]]

30 days with an explanation of the reason for disapproval. If the 
sponsor submits a revised claim, final action shall be completed within 
45 days of receipt.
    (4) Claims for reimbursement shall report information in accordance 
with the financial management system established by the State agency, 
and in sufficient detail to justify the reimbursement claimed and to 
enable the State agency to provide the Reports of Summer Food Service 
Program Operations required under Sec. 225.8(b). In submitting a claim 
for reimbursement, each sponsor shall certify that the claim is correct 
and that records are available to support this claim. Failure to 
maintain such records may be grounds for denial of reimbursement for 
meals served and/or administrative costs claimed during the period 
covered by the records in question. The costs of meals served to adults 
performing necessary food service labor may be included in the claim. 
Under no circumstances may a sponsor claim the cost of any disallowed 
meals as operating costs.
    (5) A final Claim for Reimbursement shall be postmarked and/or 
submitted to the State agency not later than 60 days after the last day 
of the month covered by the claim. State agencies may establish shorter 
deadlines at their discretion. Claims not filed within the 60 day 
deadline shall not be paid with Program funds unless FCS determines that 
an exception should be granted. The State agency shall promptly take 
corrective action with respect to any Claim for Reimbursement as 
determined necessary through its claim review process or otherwise. In 
taking such corrective action, State agencies may make upward 
adjustments in Program funds claimed on claims filed within the 60 day 
deadline if such adjustments are completed within 90 days of the last 
day of the month covered by the claim and are reflected in the final 
Program Operations Report (FCS-418). Upward adjustments in Program funds 
claimed which are not reflected in the final FCS-418 for the month 
covered by the claim cannot be made unless authorized by FCS. Downward 
adjustments in Program funds claimed shall always be made without FCS 
authorization, regardless of when it is determined that such adjustments 
are necessary.
    (6) With the exception of academic-year NYSP sponsors, whose 
reimbursements are set forth in paragraph (d)(10) of this section, 
payments to a sponsor for operating costs shall equal the lesser of the 
following totals:
    (i) The actual operating costs incurred by the sponsor; or
    (ii) The sum of the amounts derived by multiplying the number of 
meals, by type, actually served under the sponsor's program to eligible 
children by the current rates for each meal type, as adjusted in 
accordance with paragraph (d)(8) of this section.
    (7) With the exception of academic-year NYSP sponsors, whose 
reimbursements are set forth in paragraph (d)(10) of this section, 
payments to a sponsor for administrative costs shall equal the lowest of 
the following totals:
    (i) The amount estimated in the sponsor's approved administrative 
budget (taking into account any amendments);
    (ii) The actual administrative costs incurred by the sponsor; or
    (iii) The sum of the amounts derived by multiplying the number of 
meals, by type, actually served under the sponsor's program to eligible 
children by the current administrative rates for each meal type, as 
adjusted in accordance with paragraph (d)(8) of this section. Sponsors 
shall be eligible to receive additional administrative reimbursement for 
each meal served to participating children at rural or self-preparation 
sites, and the rates for such additional administrative reimbursement 
shall be adjusted in accordance with paragraph (d)(8) of this section.
    (8) Each January 1, FCS shall publish a notice in the Federal 
Register announcing any adjustment to the reimbursement rates described 
in paragraphs (d) (6)(ii) and (7)(iii) of this section. Adjustments 
shall be based upon changes in the series for food away from home of the 
Consumer Price Index for all Urban Consumers since the establishment of 
the rates.
    (9) Sponsors of camps shall be reimbursed only for meals served to 
children in camps whose eligibility for

[[Page 144]]

Program meals is documented. Sponsors of NYSP sites shall only claim 
reimbursement for meals served to children enrolled in the NYSP.
    (10) Sponsors of NYSP sites operating during the academic year shall 
claim reimbursement for no more than 30 days of meal service for the 
period October through April. For meals served to children at NYSP sites 
during the months October through April, sponsors shall be reimbursed as 
follows:
    (i) For each eligible lunch or supper served, the rate for lunches 
served free in the National School Lunch Program, as described in 7 CFR 
part 210, Sec. 210.4(b).
    (ii) For each eligible breakfast or supplement served, the rate for 
severe need breakfasts served free in the School Breakfast Program, as 
described in 7 CFR part 220, Sec. 220.9(b).
    (11) If a State agency has reason to believe that a sponsor or food 
service management company has engaged in unlawful acts in connection 
with Program operations, evidence found in audits, reviews, or 
investigations shall be a basis for nonpayment of the applicable 
sponsor's claims for reimbursement.
    (e) The sponsor may claim reimbursement for any meals which are 
examined for meal quality by the State agency, auditors, or local health 
authorities and found to meet the meal pattern requirements.
    (f) The sponsor shall not claim reimbursement for meals served to 
children at any site in excess of the site's approved level of meal 
service, if one has been established under Sec. 225.6(d)(2). However, 
the total number of meals for which operating costs are claimed may 
exceed the approved level of meal service if the meals exceeding this 
level were served to adults performing necessary food service labor in 
accordance with paragraph (d)(4) of this section. In reviewing a 
sponsor's claim, the State agency shall ensure that reimbursements for 
second meals are limited to the percentage tolerance established in 
Sec. 225.15(b)(4).

[54 FR 18208, Apr. 27, 1989, as amended at 55 FR 13469, Apr. 10, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 225.10  Audits and management evaluations.

    (a) Audits. State agencies shall arrange for audits of their own 
operations to be conducted in accordance with the Department's Uniform 
Federal Assistance Regulations (7 CFR part 3015). Unless otherwise 
exempt, sponsors shall arrange for audits to be conducted in accordance 
with 7 CFR part 3015. State agencies shall provide OIG with full 
opportunity to audit the State agency and sponsors. Each State agency 
shall make available its records, including records of the receipt and 
expenditure of funds, upon a reasonable request from OIG. While OIG 
shall rely to the fullest extent feasible upon State-sponsored audits of 
sponsors, it shall, when considered necessary, (1) make audits on a 
State-wide basis, (2) perform on-site test audits, and (3) review audit 
reports and related working papers of audits performed by or for State 
agencies.
    (b) Management evaluations. (1) State agencies shall provide FCS 
with full opportunity to conduct management evaluations (including 
visits to sponsors) of all operations of the State agency. Each State 
agency shall make available its records, including records of the 
receipts and expenditures of funds, upon a reasonable request by FCS.
    (2) The State agency shall fully respond to any recommendations made 
by FCSRO pursuant to the management evaluation.
    (3) FCSRO may require the State agency to submit on 20 days notice a 
corrective action plan regarding serious problems observed during any 
phase of the management evaluation.
    (c) Disregards. In conducting management evaluations or audits for 
any fiscal year, the State agency, FCS or OIG may disregard overpayment 
which does not exceed $100 or, in the case of State agency administered 
programs, does not exceed the amount established by State law, 
regulations or procedures as a minimum for which claims will be made for 
State losses generally. No overpayment shall be disregarded, however, 
when there are unpaid claims for the same fiscal year from which the 
overpayment can be deducted or when

[[Page 145]]

there is substantial evidence of violation of criminal law or civil 
fraud statutes.


<R05>
Sec. 225.11  Corrective action procedures.

    (a) Purpose. The provisions in this section shall be used by the 
State agency to improve Program performance.
    (b) Investigations. Each State agency shall promptly investigate 
complaints received or irregularities noted in connection with the 
operation of the Program, and shall take appropriate action to correct 
any irregularities. The State agency shall maintain on file all evidence 
relating to such investigations and actions. The State agency shall 
inform the appropriate FCSRO of any suspected fraud or criminal abuse in 
the Program which would result in a loss or misuse of Federal funds. The 
Department may make investigations at the request of the State agency, 
or where the Department determines investigations are appropriate.
    (c) Denial of applications and termination of sponsors. Except as 
specified below, the State agency shall not enter into an agreement with 
any applicant sponsor identifiable through its corporate organization, 
officers, employees, or otherwise, as an institution which participated 
in any Federal child nutrition program and was seriously deficient in 
its operation of any such program. The State agency shall terminate the 
Program agreement with any sponsor which it determines to be seriously 
deficient. However, the State agency shall afford a sponsor reasonable 
opportunity to correct problems before terminating the sponsor for being 
seriously deficient. The State agency may approve the application of a 
sponsor which has been disapproved or terminated in prior years in 
accordance with this paragraph if the sponsor demonstrates to the 
satisfaction of the State agency that the sponsor has taken appropriate 
corrective actions to prevent recurrence of the deficiencies. Serious 
deficiencies which are grounds for disapproval of applications and for 
termination include, but are not limited to, any of the following:
    (1) Noncompliance with the applicable bid procedures and contract 
requirements of Federal child nutrition program regulations;
    (2) The submission of false information to the State agency;
    (3) Failure to return to the State agency any start-up or advance 
payments which exceeded the amount earned for serving meals in 
accordance with this part, or failure to submit all claims for 
reimbursement in any prior year, provided that failure to return any 
advance payments for months for which claims for reimbursement are under 
dispute from any prior year shall not be grounds for disapproval in 
accordance with this paragraph; and
    (4) Program violations at a significant proportion of the sponsor's 
sites. Such violations include, but are not limited to, the following:
    (i) Noncompliance with the meal service time restrictions set forth 
at Sec. 225.16(c);
    (ii) Failure to maintain adequate records;
    (iii) Failure to adjust meal orders to conform to variations in the 
number of participating children;
    (iv) The simultaneous service of more than one meal to any child;
    (v) The claiming of Program payments for meals not served to 
participating children;
    (vi) Service of a significant number of meals which did not include 
required quantities of all meal components;
    (vii) Excessive instances of off-site meal consumption;
    (viii) Continued use of food service management companies that are 
in violation of health codes.
    (d) Meal service restriction. With the exception for residential 
camps set forth at Sec. 225.16(b)(1)(ii), the State agency shall 
restrict to one meal service per day:
    (1) Any food service site which is determined to be in violation of 
the time restrictions for meal service set forth at Sec. 225.16(c) when 
corrective action is not taken within a reasonable time as determined by 
the State agency; and
    (2) All sites under a sponsor if more than 20 percent of the 
sponsor's sites are determined to be in violation of the time 
restrictions set forth at Sec. 225.16(c).

If this action results in children not receiving meals under the 
Program, the State agency shall make reasonable effort to locate another 
source of meal service for these children.

[[Page 146]]

    (e) Meal disallowances. (1) If the State agency determines that a 
sponsor has failed to plan, prepare, or order meals with the objective 
of providing only one meal per child at each meal service at a site, the 
State agency shall disallow the number of children's meals prepared or 
ordered in excess of the number of children served.
    (2) If the State agency observes meal service violations during the 
conduct of a site review, the State agency shall disallow as meals 
served to children all of the meals observed to be in violation.
    (3) The State agency shall also disallow children's meals which are 
in excess of a site's approved level established under Sec. 225.6(d)(2).
    (f) Corrective action and termination of sites. (1) Whenever the 
State agency observes violations during the course of a site review, it 
shall require the sponsor to take corrective action. If the State agency 
finds a high level of meal service violations, the State agency shall 
require a specific immediate corrective action plan to be followed by 
the sponsor and shall either conduct a follow-up visit or in some other 
manner verify that the specified corrective action has been taken.
    (2) The State agency shall terminate the participation of a 
sponsor's site if the sponsor fails to take action to correct the 
Program violations noted in a State agency review report within the 
timeframes established by the corrective action plan.
    (3) The State agency shall immediately terminate the participation 
of a sponsor's site if during a review it determines that the health or 
safety of the participating children is imminently threatened.
    (4) If the site is vended, the State agency shall within 48 hours 
notify the food service management company providing meals to the site 
of the site's termination.

[54 FR 18208, Apr. 27, 1989, as amended at 55 FR 13469, Apr. 10, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 225.12  Claims against sponsors.

    (a) The State agency shall disallow any portion of a claim for 
reimbursement and recover any payment to a sponsor not properly payable 
under this part, except as provided for in Sec. 225.10(c). State 
agencies may consider claims for reimbursement not properly payable if a 
sponsor's records do not justify all costs and meals claimed. However, 
the State agency shall notify the sponsor of the reasons for any 
disallowance or demand for repayment.
    (b) Minimum State agency collection procedures for unearned payments 
shall include:
    (1) Written demand to the sponsor for the return of improper 
payments;
    (2) If after 30 calendar days the sponsor fails to remit full 
payment or agree to a satisfactory repayment schedule, a second written 
demand for the return of improper payments, sent by certified mail, 
return receipt requested;
    (3) If after 60 calendar days following the original written demand, 
the sponsor fails to remit full payment or agree to a satisfactory 
repayment schedule, a third written demand for the return of improper 
payments, sent by certified mail, return receipt requested;
    (4) If after 90 calendar days following the original written demand, 
the sponsor fails to remit full payment or agree to a satisfactory 
repayment schedule, the State agency shall refer the claim against the 
sponsor to the appropriate State or Federal authorities for pursuit of 
legal remedies.
    (c) If FCS does not concur with the State agency's action in paying 
a sponsor or in failing to collect an overpayment, FCS shall notify the 
State agency of its intention to assert a claim against the State 
agency. In all such cases, the State agency shall have full opportunity 
to submit evidence concerning the action taken. The State agency shall 
be liable to FCS for failure to collect an overpayment unless FCS 
determines that the State agency has conformed with this part in issuing 
the payment and has exerted reasonable efforts in accordance with 
paragraph (b) of this section to recover the improper payment.
    (d) The amounts recovered by the State agency from sponsors may be 
utilized to make Program payments to sponsors for the period for which 
the funds were initially available and/or to repay the State for any of 
its own funds used to make payments on claims for reimbursement. Any 
amounts recovered which are not so

[[Page 147]]

utilized shall be returned to FCS in accordance with the requirements of 
this part.


<R05>
Sec. 225.13  Appeal procedures.

    (a) Each State agency shall establish a procedure to be followed by 
an applicant appealing: A denial of an application for participation; a 
denial of a sponsor's request for an advance payment; a denial of a 
sponsor's claim for reimbursement (except for late submission under 
Sec. 225.9(d)(5)); a State agency's refusal to forward to FCS an 
exception request by the sponsor for payment of a late claim or a 
request for an upward adjustment to a claim; a claim against a sponsor 
for remittance of a payment; the termination of the sponsor or a site; a 
denial of a sponsor's application for a site; a denial of a food service 
management company's application for registration; or the revocation of 
a food service management company's registration. Appeals shall not be 
allowed on decisions made by FCS with respect to late claims or upward 
adjustments under Sec. 225.9(d)(5).
    (b) At a minimum, appeal procedures shall provide that:
    (1) The sponsor or food service management company be advised in 
writing of the grounds upon which the State agency based the action. The 
notice of action, which shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt 
requested, shall also state that the sponsor or food service management 
company has the right to appeal the State's action;
    (2) The sponsor or food service management company be advised in 
writing that the appeal must be made within a specified time and must 
meet the requirements of paragraph (b)(4) of this section. The State 
agency shall establish this period of time at not less than one week nor 
more than two weeks from the date on which the notice of action is 
received;
    (3) The appellant be allowed the opportunity to review any 
information upon which the action was based;
    (4) The appellant be allowed to refute the charges contained in the 
notice of action either in person or by filing written documentation 
with the review official. To be considered, written documentation must 
be submitted by the appellant within seven days of submitting the 
appeal, must clearly identify the State agency action being appealed, 
and must include a photocopy of the notice of action issued by the State 
agency;
    (5) A hearing be held by the review official in addition to, or in 
lieu of, a review of written information submitted by the appellant only 
if the appellant so specifies in the letter appealing the action. The 
appellant may retain legal counsel or may be represented by another 
person. Failure of the appellant's representative to appear at a 
scheduled hearing shall constitute the appellant's waiver of the right 
to a personal appearance before the review official, unless the review 
official agrees to reschedule the hearing. A representative of the State 
agency shall be allowed to attend the hearing to respond to the 
appellant's testimony and written information and to answer questions 
from the review official;
    (6) If the appellant has requested a hearing, the appellant and the 
State agency shall be provided with at least 5 days advance written 
notice, sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the time 
and place of the hearing;
    (7) The hearing be held within 14 days of the date of the receipt of 
the request for review, but, where applicable, not before the 
appellant's written documentation is received in accordance with 
paragraphs (b) (4) and (5) of this section;
    (8) The review official be independent of the original decision-
making process;
    (9) The review official make a determination based on information 
provided by the State agency and the appellant, and on Program 
regulations;
    (10) Within 5 working days after the appellant's hearing, or within 
5 working days after receipt of written documentation if no hearing is 
held, the reviewing official make a determination based on a full review 
of the administrative record and inform the appellant of the 
determination of the review by certified mail, return receipt requested;
    (11) The State agency's action remain in effect during the appeal 
process. However, participating sponsors and

[[Page 148]]

sites may continue to operate the Program during an appeal of 
termination, and if the appeal results in overturning the State agency's 
decision, reimbursement shall be paid for meals served during the appeal 
process. However, such continued Program operation shall not be allowed 
if the State agency's action is based on imminent dangers to the health 
or welfare of children. If the sponsor or site has been terminated for 
this reason, the State agency shall so specify in its notice of action; 
and
    (12) The determination by the State review official is the final 
administrative determination to be afforded to the appellant.
    (c) The State agency shall send written notification of the complete 
appeal procedures and of the actions which are appealable, as specified 
in paragraph (a) of this section, to each potential sponsor applying to 
participate and to each food service management company applying to 
register in accordance with Sec. 225.6(g).
    (d) A record regarding each review shall be kept by the State 
agency, as required under Sec. 225.8(a). The record shall document the 
State agency's compliance with these regulations and shall include the 
basis for its decision.


<R04>
                 Subpart C--Sponsor and Site Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 225.14  Requirements for sponsor participation.

    (a) Applications. Sponsors shall make written application to the 
State agency to participate in the Program. Such application shall be 
made on a timely basis in accordance with the requirements of 
Sec. 225.6(b)(1).
    (b) Sponsor eligibility. Applicants eligible to sponsor the Program 
include:
    (1) Public or nonprofit private school food authorities;
    (2) Public or nonprofit private residential summer camps;
    (3) Units of local, municipal, county, or State governments;
    (4) Public or private nonprofit colleges or universities which are 
currently participating in the National Youth Sports Program; and
    (5) Private nonprofit organizations as defined in Sec. 225.2.
    (c) General requirements. No applicant sponsor shall be eligible to 
participate in the Program unless it:
    (1) Demonstrates financial and administrative capability for Program 
operations and accepts final financial and administrative responsibility 
for total Program operations at all sites at which it proposes to 
conduct a food service;
    (2) Has not been seriously deficient in operating the Program;
    (3) Will conduct a regularly scheduled food service for children 
from areas in which poor economic conditions exist, or qualifies as a 
camp or a homeless feeding site;
    (4) Has adequate supervisory and operational personnel for overall 
monitoring and management of each site, including adequate personnel to 
conduct the visits and reviews required in Secs. 225.15(d) (2) and (3);
    (5) Provides an ongoing year-round service to the community which it 
proposes to serve under the Program, except as provided for in 
Sec. 225.6(b)(4);
    (6) Certifies that all sites have been visited and have the 
capability and the facilities to provide the meal service planned for 
the number of children anticipated to be served; and
    (7) Enters into a written agreement with the State agency upon 
approval of its application, as required in Sec. 225.6(e).
    (d) Requirements specific to sponsor types. (1) If the sponsor is 
not a camp or a homeless feeding site, it shall provide documentation 
that its food service will serve children from an area in which poor 
economic conditions exist, as defined in Sec. 225.2.
    (2) If the sponsor is a camp, it shall certify that it will collect 
information on participants' eligibility to support its claim for 
reimbursement.
    (3) If the sponsor administers the Program at sites at which summer 
school is in session, it shall ensure that such sites are open both to 
children enrolled in summer school and to all children residing in the 
area served by the site.
    (4) Sponsors which are units of local, municipal, county or State 
government, and sponsors which are private nonprofit organizations, 
shall be approved to administer the Program only at sites over which 
they have direct

[[Page 149]]

operational control. Such operational control means that the sponsor 
shall be responsible for:
    (i) Managing site staff, including such areas as hiring, terminating 
and determining conditions of employment for site staff; and
    (ii) Exercising management control over Program operations at sites 
throughout the period of Program participation by performing the 
functions specified in Sec. 225.15.
    (5) If the sponsor administers homeless feeding sites, it shall 
document that the site is not a residential child care institution as 
defined in paragraph (c), definition of `school', Sec. 210.2 of the 
National School Lunch Program regulations, and that the site's primary 
purpose is to provide shelter and meals to homeless families. In 
addition, sponsors of homeless feeding sites shall certify that such 
sites employ meal counting methods which ensure that reimbursement is 
claimed only for meals served to homeless and non-homeless children.
    (6) If the sponsor administers NYSP sites, it shall ensure that 
applications have been taken to document the site's eligibility and that 
all children at such sites are enrolled participants in the NYSP.
    (7) If the sponsor is a private nonprofit organization, it shall 
certify that it:
    (i) Serves a total of not more than 2,500 children per day;
    (ii) Serves no more than five sites in any urban area, or 20 sites 
in any rural area, with not more than 300 children being served at any 
approved meal service at any one site (or, with a waiver granted by the 
State in accordance with Sec. 225.6(b)(6)(iii) of this part, not more 
than 500 children being served at any approved meal service at any one 
site);
    (iii) Either uses self-preparation facilities to prepare meals or 
obtains meals from a public facility (such as a school district, public 
hospital, or State university) or a school participating in the National 
School Lunch Program;
    (iv) Operates in areas where a school food authority or the local, 
municipal, or county government has not indicated by March 1 of the 
current year that such authority or unit of local government will 
operate the Program in the current year (except that, if a school food 
authority or local, municipal, or county government has served that area 
in the prior year's Program, the private nonprofit organization may only 
operate in that area if it receives a waiver from the State agency in 
accordance with Sec. 225.6(a)(3)(iv)(B));
    (v) Exercises full control and authority over the operation of the 
Program at all sites under its sponsorship;
    (vi) Provides ongoing year-round activities for children or 
families;
    (vii) Demonstrates that it possesses adequate management and the 
fiscal capacity to operate the Program; and
    (viii) Meets applicable State and local health, safety, and 
sanitation standards.

[54 FR 18208, Apr. 27, 1989, as amended at 55 FR 13469, Apr. 10, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 225.15  Management responsibilities of sponsors.

    (a) General. (1) Sponsors shall operate the food service in 
accordance with: the provisions of this part; any instructions and 
handbooks issued by FCS under this part; and any instructions and 
handbooks issued by the State agency which are not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this part.
    (2) Sponsors shall not claim reimbursement under parts 210, 215, 
220, or 226 of this chapter. In addition, sponsors administering 
homeless feeding sites shall ensure that, if such sites receive 
commodities as a ``charitable institution'' pursuant to part 250 of this 
chapter (Secs. 250.3 and 250.41) during their participation in the 
Program, the site's records establish that its allotment of FDCIP 
commodities was based only on the number of eligible adult meals served, 
while the site's SFSP commodity allotment was based only on the number 
of eligible children's meals served. Sponsors may use funds from other 
Federally-funded programs to supplement their meal service but must, in 
calculating their claim for reimbursement, deduct such funds from total 
operating and administrative costs in accordance with the definition of 
``income accruing to the Program'' at Sec. 225.2 and with the 
regulations at Sec. 225.9(d). Sponsors which are school

[[Page 150]]

food authorities may use facilities, equipment and personnel supported 
by funds provided under this part to support a nonprofit nutrition 
program for the elderly, including a program funded under the Older 
Americans Act of 1965 (42 U.S.C. 3001 et seq.).
    (3) No sponsor may contract out for the management responsibilities 
of the Program described in this section.
    (b) Meal Ordering. (1) Each sponsor shall, to the maximum extent 
feasible, utilize either its own food service facilities or obtain meals 
from a school food service facility. If the sponsor obtains meals from a 
school food service facility, the applicable requirements of this part 
shall be embodied in a written agreement between the sponsor and the 
school.
    (2) Upon approval of its application or any adjustment in the 
approved levels of meal service for its sites established under 
Sec. 225.6(d)(2), vended sponsors shall inform their food service 
management company of the approved level at each site for which the food 
service management company will provide meals.
    (3) Sponsors shall plan for and prepare or order meals on the basis 
of participation trends with the objective of providing only one meal 
per child at each meal service. The sponsor shall make the adjustments 
necessary to achieve this objective using the results from its 
monitoring of sites. For sites for which approved levels of meal service 
have been established in accordance with Sec. 225.6(d)(2), the sponsor 
shall adjust the number of meals ordered or prepared with the objective 
of providing only one meal per child whenever the number of children 
attending the site is below the approved level. The sponsor shall not 
order or prepare meals for children at any site in excess of the site's 
approved level, but may order or prepare meals above the approved level 
if the meals are to be served to adults performing necessary food 
service labor in accordance with Sec. 225.9(d)(4). Records of 
participation and of preparation or ordering of meals shall be 
maintained to demonstrate positive action toward meeting this objective.
    (4) In recognition of the fluctuation in participation levels which 
makes it difficult to estimate precisely the number of meals needed and 
to reduce the resultant waste, sponsors may claim reimbursement for a 
number of second meals which does not exceed two percent of the number 
of first meals served to children for each meal type (i.e., breakfasts, 
lunches, supplements, or suppers) during the claiming period. The State 
agency shall disallow all claims for second meals if it determines that 
the sponsor failed to plan and prepare or order meals with the objective 
of providing only one meal per child at each meal service. Second meals 
shall be served only after all participating children at the site's meal 
service have been served a meal.
    (c) Records and claims. (1) Sponsors shall maintain accurate records 
which justify all costs and meals claimed. Failure to maintain such 
records may be grounds for denial of reimbursement for meals served and/
or administrative costs claimed during the period covered by the records 
in question. The sponsor's records shall be available at all times for 
inspection and audit by representatives of the Secretary, the 
Comptroller General of the United States, and the State agency for a 
period of three years following the date of submission of the final 
claim for reimbursement for the fiscal year.
    (2) Sponsors shall submit claims for reimbursement in accordance 
with this part. All final claims must be submitted to the State agency 
within 60 days following the last day of the month covered by the claim.
    (d) Training and monitoring. (1) Each sponsor shall hold Program 
training sessions for its administrative and site personnel and shall 
allow no site to operate until personnel have attended at least one of 
these training sessions. Training of site personnel shall, at a minimum, 
include: the purpose of the Program; site eligibility; recordkeeping; 
site operations; meal pattern requirements; and the duties of a monitor. 
Each sponsor shall ensure that its administrative personnel attend State 
agency training provided to sponsors, and sponsors shall provide 
training throughout the summer to ensure that administrative personnel 
are thoroughly knowledgeable in all required areas of Program 
administration and

[[Page 151]]

operation and are provided with sufficient information to enable them to 
carry out their Program responsibilities. Each site shall have present 
at each meal service at least one person who has received this training.
    (2) Sponsors shall visit each of their sites at least once during 
the first week of operation under the Program and shall promptly take 
such actions as are necessary to correct any deficiencies.
    (3) Sponsors shall review food service operations at each site at 
least once during the first four weeks of Program operations, and 
thereafter shall maintain a reasonable level of site monitoring. 
Sponsors shall complete a monitoring form developed by the State agency 
during the conduct of these reviews.
    (e) Media Release. Each sponsor shall annually announce in the media 
serving the area from which it draws its attendance the availability of 
free meals. Camps and other programs not eligible under Sec. 225.2 
(paragraph (a) of ``areas in which poor economic conditions exist'') 
shall annually announce to all participants the availability of free 
meals for eligible children. All media releases issued by camps and 
other programs not eligible under Sec. 225.2 (paragraph (a) of ``areas 
in which poor economic conditions exist'') shall include: the 
Secretary's family-size and income standards for reduced price school 
meals labelled ``SFSP Income Eligibility Standards''; a statement that 
children who are members of food stamp households or AFDC assistance 
units are automatically eligible to receive free meal benefits at 
eligible program sites; and a statement that meals are available without 
regard to race, color, national origin, sex, age, or handicap.
    (f) Application for free Program meals. (1) For the purpose of 
determining eligibility for free Program meals, camps and other programs 
not eligible under Sec. 225.2 (paragraph (a) of ``areas in which poor 
economic conditions exist'') shall distribute applications for meals to 
parents or guardians of children enrolled in the program. The 
application, and any other descriptive material distributed to such 
persons, shall contain only the family-size and income levels for 
reduced price school meal eligibility with an explanation that 
households with incomes less than or equal to these values are eligible 
for free Program meals. Such forms and descriptive material may not 
contain the income standards for free meals in the National School Lunch 
or School Breakfast Programs. In addition, such forms and materials 
shall state that, if a child is a member of a food stamp household or an 
AFDC assistance unit, the child is automatically eligible to receive 
free program meal benefits, subject to completion of the application as 
described in paragraph (f)(3) of this section.
    (2) Except as provided in paragraph (f)(3) of this section, the 
application shall contain a request for the following information: (i) 
The names of all children for whom application is made; (ii) the names 
of all other household members; (iii) the social security number of the 
adult household member who signs the application, or an indication that 
he/she does not possess a social security number; (iv) the income 
received by each household member, identified by source of income (such 
as earnings, wages, welfare, pensions, support payments, unemployment 
compensation, social security, and other cash income); (v) a statement 
to the effect that, ``In certain cases, foster children are eligible for 
free meals regardless of household income. If such children are living 
with you and you wish to apply for such meals, please contact us''; (vi) 
a statement which includes substantially the following information: 
``Section 9 of the National School Lunch Act requires that, unless a 
food stamp or AFDC case number is provided for your child, you must 
include the social security number of the adult household member signing 
the application, or indicate that the household member does not have a 
social security number. Provision of a social security number is not 
mandatory, but if a social security number is not provided or an 
indication is not made that the signer does not have a social security 
number, the application cannot be approved. This notice must be brought 
to the attention of the household member whose social security number is 
disclosed. The social security number may

[[Page 152]]

be used to identify the household member in carrying out efforts to 
verify the correctness of information stated on the application. These 
verification efforts may be carried out through program reviews, audits 
and investigations and may include contacting employers to determine 
income; contacting a food stamp or welfare office to determine current 
certification for receipt of food stamp or AFDC benefits; contacting the 
State employment security office to determine the amount of benefits 
received; and checking the documentation produced by household members 
to prove the amount of income received. These efforts may result in loss 
of benefits, administrative claims, or legal action if incorrect 
information is reported.'' State agencies and sponsors shall ensure that 
the notice complies with section 7 of Pub. L. 93-579 (Privacy Act of 
1974). If a State or local agency plans to use the social security 
numbers in a manner not described by this notice, the notice shall be 
altered to include a description of these uses. The sponsor shall take 
the income information provided by the household on the application and 
calculate the household's total current income; and (vii) the signature 
of an adult member of the household immediately below a statement that 
the person signing the application certifies that all information 
furnished is true and correct; that the application is being made in 
connection with the receipt of Federal funds; that program officials may 
verify the information on the application; and that the deliberate 
misrepresentation of any of the information on the application may 
subject the applicant to prosecution under applicable State and Federal 
criminal statutes.
    (3) If they so desire, households applying on behalf of children who 
are members of food stamp households or AFDC assistance units may apply 
for free meal benefits using the procedures described in this paragraph 
rather than the procedures described in paragraph (f)(2) of this 
section. In accordance with paragraph (f)(2)(vi) of this section, if a 
food stamp or AFDC case number is provided, it may be used to verify the 
current food stamp or AFDC certification for the child(ren) for whom 
free meal benefits are being claimed. Whenever households applying for 
benefits for children not receiving food stamp or AFDC benefits, they 
must apply for those children in accordance with the requirements set 
forth in paragraph (f)(2) of this section. Households applying on behalf 
of children who are members of food stamp households or AFDC assistance 
units shall be required to provide:
    (i) The name(s) and food stamp or AFDC case number(s) of the 
child(ren) for whom automatic free meal eligibility is claimed; and
    (ii) The signature of an adult member of the household below the 
statement described in paragraph (f)(2)(vii) of this section.
    (4) Households selected to provide verification shall provide a 
social security number for each adult household member or an indication 
that such member does not have one. The notice to households of 
selection for verification shall include the following:
    (i) Section 9 of the National School Lunch requires that unless the 
child's food stamp or AFDC case number is provided, households selected 
for verification must provide the social security number of each adult 
household member;
    (ii) In lieu of providing a social security number, an adult 
household member may indicate that he/she does not possess one;
    (iii) Provision of a social security number is not mandatory but if 
a social security number is not provided for each adult household member 
or an indication is not made that he/she does not possess one, benefits 
will be terminated;
    (iv) The social security number may be used to identify household 
members in carrying out efforts to verify the correctness of information 
stated on the application and continued eligibility for the program. 
These verification efforts may be carried out through program reviews, 
audits, and investigations and may include contacting employers to 
determine income, contacting a food stamp or welfare office to determine 
current certification for receipt of food stamps or AFDC benefits, 
contacting the State employment security office to determine the amount 
of

[[Page 153]]

benefits received and checking the documentation produced by household 
members to prove the amount of income received. These efforts may result 
in loss or reduction of benefits, administrative claims or legal actions 
if incorrect information was reported; and
    (v) This information must be provided to the attention of each adult 
household member disclosing his/her social security number. State 
agencies shall ensure that the notice complies with section 7 of Pub. L. 
93-579 (Privacy Act of 1974). These households shall be provided with 
the name and phone number of an official who can assist in the 
verification effort. Selected households shall also be informed that, in 
lieu of any information that would otherwise be required, they can 
submit proof of current food stamp or AFDC Program certification as 
described in paragraph (f)(3) of this section to verify the free meal 
eligibility of a child who is a member of a food stamp household or AFDC 
assistance unit. All households selected for verification shall be 
advised that failure to cooperate with verification efforts will result 
in the termination of benefits.

    (g) Food service management companies. (1) Failure by a sponsor to 
comply with the provisions of this section shall be sufficient grounds 
for the State agency to terminate that sponsor's participation in 
accordance with Sec. 225.18.
    (2) A sponsor may contract only with a food service management 
company which is registered with the State in which the sponsor will 
operate the Program, unless the food service management company is not 
required to register in accordance with Sec. 225.6(g)(9).
    (3) Any sponsor except a private nonprofit organization may contract 
with a food service management company to manage the sponsor's food 
service operations and/or for the preparation of unitized meals with or 
without milk or juice. Exceptions to the unitizing requirement may only 
be made in accordance with the provisions set forth at Sec. 225.6(h)(3).
    (4) Any vended sponsor shall be responsible for ensuring that its 
food service operation is in conformity with its agreement with the 
State agency and with all the applicable provisions of this part.
    (5) In addition to any applicable State or local laws governing bid 
procedures, and with the exceptions identified in this paragraph, each 
sponsor which contracts with a food service management company shall 
comply with the competitive bid procedures described in this paragraph. 
Sponsors which are schools or school food authorities and which have an 
exclusive contract with a food service management company for year-round 
service, and sponsors whose total contracts with food service management 
companies will not exceed $10,000, shall not be required to comply with 
these procedures. These exceptions do not relieve the sponsor of the 
responsibility to ensure that competitive procurement procedures are 
followed in contracting with any food service management company. Each 
sponsor whose proposed contract is subject to the specific bid 
procedures set forth in this paragraph shall ensure, at a minimum, that:
    (i) All proposed contracts are publicly announced at least once, not 
less than 14 calendar days prior to the opening of bids, and the 
announcement includes the time and place of the bid opening;
    (ii) The bids are publicly opened;
    (iii) The State agency is notified, at least 14 calendar days prior 
to the opening of the bids, of the time and place of the bid opening;
    (iv) The invitation to bid does not specify a minimum price;
    (v) The invitation to bid contains a cycle menu approved by the 
State agency upon which the bid is based;
    (vi) The invitation to bid contains food specifications and meal 
quality standards approved by the State agency upon which the bid is 
based;
    (vii) The invitation to bid does not specify special meal 
requirements to meet ethnic or religious needs unless such special 
requirements are necessary to meet the needs of the children to be 
served;
    (viii) Neither the invitation to bid nor the contract provides for 
loans or any other monetary benefit or term or condition to be made to 
sponsors by food service management companies;

[[Page 154]]

    (ix) Nonfood items are excluded from the invitation to bid, except 
where such items are essential to the conduct of the food service;
    (x) A copy of the food service management company registration 
determination issued by the State agency is submitted by the food 
service management company with its bid;
    (xi) Copies of all contracts between sponsors and food service 
management companies, along with a certification of independent price 
determination, are submitted to the State agency prior to the beginning 
of Program operations;
    (xii) Copies of all bids received are submitted to the State agency, 
along with the sponsor's reason for choosing the successful bidder; and
    (xiii) All bids in an amount which exceeds the lowest bid and all 
bids totaling $100,000 or more are submitted to the State agency for 
approval before acceptance. State agencies shall respond to a request 
for approval of such bids within 5 working days of receipt.
    (6) Each food service management company which submits a bid over 
$100,000 shall obtain a bid bond in an amount not less than five (5) 
percent nor more than ten (10) percent, as determined by the sponsor, of 
the value of the contract for which the bid is made. A copy of the bid 
bond shall accompany each bid.
    (7) Each food service management company which enters into a food 
service contract for over $100,000 with a sponsor shall obtain a 
performance bond in an amount not less than ten (10) percent nor more 
than twenty-five (25) percent of the value of the contract, as 
determined by the State agency, of the value of the contract for which 
the bid is made. Any food service management company which enters into 
more than one contract with any one sponsor shall obtain a performance 
bond covering all contracts if the aggregate amount of the contracts 
exceeds $100,000. Sponsors shall require the food service management 
company to furnish a copy of the performance bond within ten days of the 
awarding of the contract.
    (8) Food service management companies shall obtain bid bonds and 
performance bonds only from surety companies listed in the current 
Department of the Treasury Circular 570. No sponsor or State agency 
shall allow food service management companies to post any 
``alternative'' forms of bid or performance bonds, including but not 
limited to cash, certified checks, letters of credit, or escrow 
accounts.
    (h) Other responsibilities. Sponsors shall comply with all of the 
meal service requirements set forth in Sec. 225.16.

[54 FR 18208, Apr. 27, 1989, as amended at 55 FR 13470, Apr. 10, 1990; 
61 FR 25553, May 22, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 225.16  Meal service requirements.

    (a) Sanitation. Sponsors shall ensure that in storing, preparing, 
and serving food, proper sanitation and health standards are met which 
conform with all applicable State and local laws and regulations. 
Sponsors shall ensure that adequate facilities are available to store 
food or hold meals. Within two weeks of receiving notification of their 
approval, but in any case prior to commencement of Program operation, 
sponsors shall submit to the State agency a copy of their letter 
advising the appropriate health department of their intention to provide 
a food service during a specific period at specific sites.
    (b) Meal Services. The meals which may be served under the Program 
are breakfast, lunch, supper, and supplemental food. No sponsor shall be 
approved to provide more than two services of supplemental food per day. 
A sponsor shall only be reimbursed for meals served in accordance with 
this section.
    (1) Camps. Sponsors of camps shall only be reimbursed for meals 
served in camps to children from families which meet the eligibility 
standards for this Program. The sponsor shall maintain a copy of the 
documentation establishing the eligibility of each child receiving meals 
under the Program. Meal service at camps shall be subject to the 
following provisions:
    (i) A camp may serve up to four meals each day;
    (ii) Residential camps are not subject to the time restrictions for 
meal service set forth at paragraphs (c) (1) and (2) of this section; 
and

[[Page 155]]

    (iii) A camp shall be approved to serve these meals only if it has 
the administrative capability to do so; if the service period of the 
different meals does not coincide or overlap; and, where applicable, if 
it has adequate food preparation and holding facilities.
    (2) Homeless Feeding Sites. Sponsors of homeless feeding sites shall 
ensure that the site's primary purpose is to provide shelter and meals 
to homeless families and that such sites claim reimbursement only for 
meals served to homeless and non-homeless children. Homeless feeding 
sites are not subject to the time restrictions for meal service set 
forth at paragraphs (c)(1)-(3) of this section.
    (3) NYSP Sites. Sponsors of NYSP sites shall only be reimbursed for 
meals served to enrolled NYSP participants at these sites. NYSP sites 
participating in the Program during the months of October through April 
shall claim reimbursement for no more than two meals or one meal and one 
supplement per day for not more than 30 days of meal service.
    (4) Restrictions on the number and type of meals served. Food 
service sites other than camps, NYSP sites operation during the months 
of October through April, and sites which primarily serve migrant 
children may serve either: (i) One meal each day, a breakfast, a lunch, 
or supplement; or (ii) two meals each day, if one is a lunch and the 
other is a breakfast or a supplement.
    (5) Sites which serve children of migrant families. Food service 
sites which primarily serve children from migrant families may be 
approved to serve up to four meals each day. These sites shall serve 
children in areas where poor economic conditions exist as defined in 
Sec. 225.2. A sponsor which operates in accordance with this part shall 
receive reimbursement for all meals served to children at these sites. A 
site which primarily serves children from migrant families shall only be 
approved to serve more than one meal each day if it has the 
administrative capability to do so; if the service period of the 
different meals does not coincide or overlap; and, where applicable, if 
it has adequate food preparation and holding facilities.
    (c) Time restrictions for meal service. (1) Three hours shall elapse 
between the beginning of one meal service, including supplements, and 
the beginning of another, except that 4 hours shall elapse between the 
service of a lunch and supper when no supplement is served between lunch 
and supper. The service of supper shall begin no later than 7 p.m., 
unless the State agency has granted a waiver of this requirement due to 
extenuating circumstances. These waivers shall be granted only when the 
State agency and the sponsor ensure that special arrangements shall be 
made to monitor these sites. In no case may the service of supper extend 
beyond 8 p.m. The time restrictions in this paragraph shall not apply to 
residential camps.
    (2) The duration of the meal service shall be limited to two hours 
for lunch or supper and one hour for all other meals.
    (3) Meals served outside of the period of approved meal service 
shall not be eligible for Program payments.
    (4) Any permanent or planned changes in meal service periods must be 
approved by the State agency.
    (5) Meals which are not prepared at the food service site shall be 
delivered no earlier than one hour prior to the beginning of the meal 
service (unless the site has adequate facilities for holding hot or cold 
meals within the temperatures required by State or local health 
regulations) and no later than the beginning of the meal service.
    (6) The sponsor shall claim for reimbursement only the type(s) of 
meals for which it is approved under its agreement with the State 
agency.
    (d) Meal patterns. The meal requirements for the Program are 
designed to provide nutritious and well-balanced meals to each child. 
Sponsors shall ensure that meals served meet all of the requirements. 
Except as otherwise provided in this section, the following tables 
present the minimum requirements for meals served to children in the 
Program.

                                Breakfast

    (1) Except in the case of NYSP sponsors participating during the 
months of October through April, children age 12

[[Page 156]]

and up may be served adult-size portions based on the greater food needs 
of older boys and girls, but shall be served not less than the minimum 
quantities specified in this section. The minimum amount of food 
components to be served as breakfast are as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
            Food components                       Minimum amount        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                          Vegetables and Fruits                         
                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Vegetable(s) and/or fruit(s)...........  \1/2\ cup.<SUP>1                    
    or                                                                  
Full-strength vegetable or fruit juice   \1/2\ cup (4 fl. oz.)          
 or an equivalent quantity of any                                       
 combination of vegetable(s), fruit(s),                                 
 and juice.                                                             
                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                      Bread and Bread Alternates <SUP>2                      
                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bread..................................  1 slice.                       
    or                                                                  
Cornbread, biscuits, rolls, muffins,     1 serving.<SUP>3                    
 etc.                                                                   
    or                                                                  
Cold dry cereal........................  \3/4\ cup or 1 oz.<SUP>4            
    or                                                                  
Cooked cereal or cereal grains.........  \1/2\ cup.                     
    or                                                                  
Cooked pasta or noodle products or an    \1/2\ cup.                     
 equivalent quantity of any combination                                 
 of bread/bread alternate.                                              
                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Milk <SUP>5                                 
                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Milk, fluid............................  1 cup (\1/2\ pint, 8 fl. oz.)  
                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                   Meat and Meat Alternates (Optional)                  
                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lean meat or poultry or fish...........  1 oz.                          
    or                                                                  
Cheese.................................  1 oz.                          
    or                                                                  
Eggs...................................  1 large egg.                   
    or                                                                  
Cooked dry beans or peas...............  \1/2\ cup.                     
    or                                                                  
Peanut butter or an equivalent quantity  2 tbsp.                        
 of any combination of meat/meat                                        
 alternate..                                                            
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ For the purposes of the requirement outlined in this table, a cup   
  means a standard measuring cup.                                       
\2\ Bread, pasta or noodle products, and cereal grains (such as rice,   
  bulgur, or corn grits) shall be whole-grain or enriched; cornbread,   
  biscuits, rolls, muffins, etc., shall be made with whole-grain or     
  enriched meal or flour; cereal shall be whole-grain, enriched or      
  fortified.                                                            
\3\ Serving sizes and equivalents will be in guidance materials to be   
  distributed by FCS to State agencies.                                 
\4\ Either volume (cup) or weight (oz.), whichever is less.             
\5\ Milk shall be served as a beverage or on cereal, or used in part for
  each purpose.                                                         

                             Lunch or Supper

    (2) Except in the case of NYSP sponsors participating during the 
months of October through April, the minimum amounts of food components 
to be served as lunch or supper are as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
            Food components                       Minimum amount        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                        Meat and Meat Alternates                        
                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lean meat or poultry or fish...........  2 oz.                          
    or                                                                  
Cheese.................................  2 oz.                          
    or                                                                  
Eggs...................................  1 large egg                    
    or                                                                  
Cooked dry beans or peas...............  \1/2\ cup <SUP>1                    
    or                                                                  
Peanut butter or soynut butter or other  4 tbsp.                        
 nut or seed butters.                                                   
    or                                                                  
Peanuts or soynuts or tree nuts or seed  1 oz. =50% <SUP>3                   
 <SUP>2.                                                                     
    or                                                                  
An equivalent quantity of any                                           
 combination of the above meat/meat                                     
 alternates.                                                            
                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                          Vegetables and Fruit                          
                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Vegetable(s) and/or fruit(s) <SUP>4.........  \3/4\ cup total                
                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                      Bread and Bread Alternates <SUP>5                      
                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bread..................................  1 slice                        
    or                                                                  
Cornbread, biscuits, rolls, muffins,     1 serving <SUP>6                    
 etc.                                                                   
    or                                                                  
Cooked pasta or noodle products........  \1/2\ cup                      
    or                                                                  
Cooked cereal grains or an equivalent    \1/2\ cup                      
 quantity of any combination of bread/                                  
 bread alternate.                                                       
                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                  Milk                                  
                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Milk, fluid, served as a beverage......  1 cup (\1/2\ pint, 8 fl. oz.)  
                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ For purposes of the requirements outlined in the table, a cup means 
  a standard measuring cup.                                             
\2\ Tree nuts and seeds that may be used as meat alternates are listed  
  in program guidance.                                                  
\3\ No more than 50% of the requirement shall be met with nuts or seeds.
  Nuts or seeds shall be combined with another meat/meat alternate to   
  fulfill the requirement. For purposes of determining combinations, 1  
  oz. of nuts or seeds is equal to 1 oz. of cooked lean meat, poultry or
  fish.                                                                 

[[Page 157]]

                                                                        
\4\ Serve 2 or more kinds of vegetable(s) and or fruit(s) or a          
  combination of both. Full strength vegetable or fruit juice may be    
  counted to meet not more than one-half of this requirement.           
\5\ Bread, pasta or noodle products, and cereal grains (such as rice,   
  bulgur, or corn grits) shall be whole-grain or enriched; cornbread,   
  biscuits, rolls, muffins, etc., shall be made with whole-grain or     
  enriched meal or flour; cereal shall be whole-grain or enriched or    
  fortified.                                                            
\6\ Serving sizes and equivalents will be in guidance materials to be   
  distributed by FCS to State agencies.                                 

                            Supplemental Food

    (3) Except in the case of NYSP sponsors participating during the 
months of October through April, the minimum amounts of food components 
to be served as supplemental food are as follows. Select two of the 
following four components. (Juice may not be served when milk is served 
as the only other component.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------
            Food components                       Minimum amount        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                        Meat and Meat Alternates                        
                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lean meat or poultry or fish...........  1 oz.                          
    or                                                                  
Cheese.................................  1 oz.                          
    or                                                                  
Eggs...................................  1 large egg.                   
    or                                                                  
Cooked dry beans or peas...............  \1/4\ cup \1\.                 
    or                                                                  
Peanut butter or soynut butter or other  2 tbsp.                        
 nut or seed butters.                                                   
    or                                                                  
Peanuts or soynuts or tree nuts or       1 oz.                          
 seeds.\2\.                                                             
    or                                                                  
Yogurt, plain, or sweetened and          4 oz. or \1/2\ cup.            
 flavored..                                                             
An equivalent quantity of any                                           
 combination of the above meat/meat                                     
 alternates.                                                            
                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                          Vegetables and Fruits                         
                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Vegetable(s) and/or fruit(s)...........  \3/4\ cup.                     
    or                                                                  
Full-strength vegetable or fruit juice   \3/4\ cup (6 fl. oz.).         
 or an equivalent quantity of any                                       
 combination of vegetable(s), fruit(s)                                  
 and juice.                                                             
                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                     Bread and Bread Alternates \3\                     
                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bread..................................  1 slice.                       
    or                                                                  
Cornbread, biscuits, rolls, muffins,     1 serving \4\.                 
 etc.                                                                   
    or                                                                  
Cold dry cereal........................  \3/4\ cup or 1 oz.\5\          
    or                                                                  
Cooked cereal..........................  \1/2\ cup.                     
    or                                                                  
Cooked cereal grains or an equivalent    \1/2\ cup.                     
 quantity of any combination of bread/                                  
 bread alternate.                                                       
                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                Milk \6\                                
                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Milk, fluid............................  1 cup (\1/2\ pint, 8 fl. oz.)  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ For purposes of the requirements outlined in this table, a cup means
  a standard measuring cup.                                             
\2\ Tree nuts and seeds that may be used as meat alternates are listed  
  in program guidance.                                                  
\3\ Bread, pasta or noodle products, and cereal grains (such as rice,   
  bulgur, or corn grits) shall be whole-grain or enriched; cornbread,   
  biscuits, rolls, muffins, etc. shall be made with whole-grain or      
  enriched meal or flour; cereal shall be whole-grain or enriched or    
  fortified.                                                            
\4\ Serving sizes and equivalents will be in guidance materials to be   
  distributed by FCS to State agencies.                                 
\5\ Either volume (cup) or weight (oz.), whichever is less.             
\6\ Milk should be served as a beverage or on cereal, or used in part   
  for each purpose.                                                     

    (e) NYSP sponsors participating in the Program during the months of 
October through April shall ensure that meals served meet all of the 
requirements specified in this paragraph.
    (1) At a minimum, a breakfast or a supplement shall contain the 
components and quantities specified for breakfasts in 7 CFR part 220, 
Sec. 220.8(a)(1)-(2), grades K-12.
    (2) At a minimum, a lunch or supper shall contain the components and 
quantities specified for lunches in 7 CFR part 210, Sec. 210.10 (c) and 
(d), Group IV (age 9 and older) and, when possible, the recommended 
quantities for children 12 and older.
    (f) Meat or meat alternate. Meat or meat alternates served under the 
Program are subject to the following requirements and recommendations.
    (1) The required quantity of meat or meat alternate shall be the 
quantity of the edible portion as served. These foods must be served in 
a main dish, or in a main dish and one other menu item.
    (2) Cooked dry beans or peas may be used as a meat alternate or as a 
vegetable, but they may not be used to meet both component requirements 
in a meal.
    (3) Textured vegetable protein products and enriched macaroni with 
fortified protein may be used to meet part, but not all, of the meat/
meat alternate requirement. The Department will provide guidance to 
State agencies

[[Page 158]]

on the part of the meat/meat alternate requirement which these foods may 
be used to meet. If enriched macaroni with fortified protein is served 
as a meat alternate it shall not be counted toward the bread 
requirement.
    (4) If the sponsor believes that the recommended portion size of any 
meat or meat alternate is too large to be appealing to children, the 
sponsor may reduce the portion size of that meat or meat alternate and 
supplement it with another meat or meat alternate to meet the full 
requirement.
    (5) Nuts and seeds and their butters listed in program guidance are 
nutritionally comparable to meat or other meat alternates based on 
available nutritional data. Acorns, chestnuts, and coconuts shall not be 
used as meat alternates due to their low protein content. Nut and seed 
meals or flours shall not be used as a meat alternate except as defined 
in this section under paragraph (e)(3) and in this part under Appendix 
A: Alternate Foods for Meals. As noted in paragraph (d)(2) of this 
section, nuts or seeds may be used to meet no more than one-half of the 
meat/meat alternate requirement for lunch or supper. Therefore, nuts or 
seeds must be combined with another meat/meat alternate to fulfill the 
requirement. For the supplemental food pattern, nuts or seeds may be 
used to fulfill all of the meat/meat alternate requirement.
    (g) Exceptions to and variations from the meal pattern. (1) Meals 
prepared in schools. The State agency may allow sponsors which serve 
meals prepared in schools participating in the National School Lunch or 
School Breakfast Programs to substitute the meal pattern requirements of 
the regulations governing those programs (7 CFR part 210 and 7 CFR part 
220, respectively) for the meal pattern requirements contained in this 
section.
    (2) Children under 6. The State agency may authorize the sponsor to 
serve food in smaller quantities than are indicated in paragraph (d) of 
this section to children under six years of age if the sponsor has the 
capability to ensure that variations in portion size are in accordance 
with the age levels of the children served. Sponsors wishing to serve 
children under one year of age shall first receive approval to do so 
from the State agency. In both cases, the sponsor shall follow the age-
appropriate meal pattern requirements contained in the Child and Adult 
Care Food Program regulations (7 CFR part 226).
    (3) Statewide substitutions. In American Samoa, Puerto Rico, Guam, 
the Virgin Islands, the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, and the 
Northern Mariana Islands, the following variations from the meal 
requirements are authorized: A serving of a starchy vegetable--such as 
ufi, tanniers, yams, plantains, or sweet potatoes--may be substituted 
for the bread requirements.
    (4) Individual substitutions. Substitutions may be made by sponsors 
in food listed in paragraph (d) of this section if individual 
participating children are unable, because of medical or other special 
dietary needs, to consume such foods. Such substitutions shall be made 
only when supported by a statement from a recognized medical authority 
which includes recommended alternate foods. Such statement shall be kept 
on file by the sponsor.
    (5) Special variations. FCS may approve variations in the food 
components of the meals on an experimental or a continuing basis for any 
sponsor where there is evidence that such variations are nutritionally 
sound and are necessary to meet ethnic, religious, economic, or physical 
needs.
    (6) Temporary unavailability of milk.  If emergency conditions 
prevent a sponsor normally having a supply of milk from temporarily 
obtaining milk deliveries, the State agency may approve the service of 
breakfasts, lunches or suppers without milk during the emergency period.
    (7) Continuing unavailability of milk. The inability of a sponsor to 
obtain a supply of milk on a continuing basis shall not bar it from 
participation in the Program. In such cases, the State agency may 
approve service of meals without milk, provided that an equivalent 
amount of canned, whole dry or nonfat dry milk is used in the 
preparation of the milk components set forth in paragraph (d) of this 
section. In addition, the State agency may approve the use of nonfat dry 
milk in meals

[[Page 159]]

served to children participating in activities which make the service of 
fluid milk impracticable, and in locations which are unable to obtain 
fluid milk. Such authorization shall stipulate that nonfat dry milk be 
reconstituted at normal dilution and under sanitary conditions 
consistent with State and local health regulations.
    (8) Additional foods. To improve the nutrition of participating 
children, additional foods may be served with each meal.

[54 FR 18208, Apr. 27, 1989, as amended at 54 FR 27153, June 28, 1989; 
Amdt. 2, 55 FR 1377, Jan. 14, 1990; 55 FR 13470, Apr. 10, 1990; 61 FR 
37672, July 19, 1996]


<R04>
              Subpart D--General Administrative Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 225.17  Procurement standards.

    (a) State agencies and sponsors shall comply with the standards 
prescribed in the Department's Uniform Federal Assistance Regulations at 
7 CFR part 3015, subpart S, in the procurement of food, supplies, goods, 
and other services with Program payments.
    (b) The State agency shall make available to sponsors information on 
7 CFR part 3015.
    (c) Sponsors may use their own procurement procedures which reflect 
applicable State and local laws and regulations, provided that 
procurements made with Program funds conform with provisions of this 
section, as well as with procurement requirements which may be 
established by the State agency, with approval of FCS, to prevent fraud, 
waste, and Program abuse.
    (d) The State agency shall ensure that all sponsors are aware of the 
following practices specified in 7 CFR part 3015, with respect to 
minority business enterprises:
    (1) Including qualified minority business enterprises on 
solicitation lists,
    (2) Soliciting minority business enterprises whenever they are 
potential sources,
    (3) When economically feasible, dividing total requirements into 
smaller tasks or quantities so as to permit maximum participation by 
minority business enterprises,
    (4) Establishing delivery schedules which will assist minority 
business enterprises to meet deadlines, and
    (5) Using the services and assistance of the Small Business 
Administration, and the Office of Minority Business Enterprise of the 
Department of Commerce as required.


<R05>
Sec. 225.18  Miscellaneous administrative provisions.

    (a) Grant closeout procedures. Grant closeout procedures for the 
Program shall be in accordance with the Department's Uniform Federal 
Assistance Regulations (7 CFR part 3015), subpart N.
    (b) Termination for cause. (1) FCS may terminate a State agency's 
participation in the Program in whole, or in part, whenever it is 
determined that the State agency has failed to comply with the 
conditions of the Program. FCS shall promptly notify the State agency in 
writing of the termination and reason for the termination, together with 
the effective date, and shall allow the State 30 calendar days to 
respond. In instances where the State does respond, FCS shall inform the 
State of its final determination no later than 30 calendar days after 
the State responds.
    (2) A State agency shall terminate a sponsor's participation in the 
Program by written notice whenever it is determined by the State agency 
that the sponsor has failed to comply with the conditions of the 
Program.
    (3) When participation in the Program has been terminated for cause, 
any funds paid to the State agency or a sponsor or any recoveries by FCS 
from the State agency or by the State agency from a sponsor shall be in 
accordance with the legal rights and liabilities of the parties.
    (c) Termination for convenience. FCS and the State agency may agree 
to terminate the State agency's participation in the Program in whole, 
or in part, when both parties agree that the continuation of the Program 
would not produce beneficial results commensurate with the further 
expenditure of funds. The two parties shall agree upon the termination 
conditions, including the effective date, and in the case of partial 
termination, the portion to be

[[Page 160]]

terminated. The State agency shall not incur new obligations for the 
terminated portion after the effective date, and shall cancel as many 
outstanding obligations as possible. The Department shall allow full 
credit to the State agency for the Federal share of the noncancellable 
obligation properly incurred by the State agency prior to termination. A 
State agency may terminate a sponsor's participation in the manner 
provided for in this paragraph.
    (d) Maintenance of effort. Expenditure of funds from State and local 
sources for the maintenance of food programs for children shall not be 
diminished as a result of funds received under the Act and a 
certification to this effect shall become part of the agreement provided 
for in Sec. 225.3(c).
    (e) Program benefits. The value of benefits and assistance available 
under the Program shall not be considered as income or resources of 
recipients and their families for any purpose under Federal, State or 
local laws, including, but not limited to, laws relating to taxation, 
welfare, and public assistance programs.
    (f) State requirements. Nothing contained in this part shall prevent 
a State agency from imposing additional operating requirements which are 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this part, provided that such 
additional requirements shall not deny the Program to an area in which 
poor economic conditions exist, and shall not result in a significant 
number of needy children not having access to the Program. Prior to 
imposing any additional requirements, the State agency must receive 
approval from FCSRO.
    (g) Fraud penalty. Whoever embezzles, willfully misapplies, steals, 
or obtains by fraud any funds, assets, or property that are the subject 
of a grant or other form of assistance under this part, whether received 
directly or indirectly from the Department, or whoever receives, 
conceals, or retains such funds, assets, or property to his use or gain, 
knowing such funds, assets, or property have been embezzled, willfully 
misapplied, stolen or obtained by fraud shall, if such funds, assets, or 
property are of the value of $100 or more, be fined not more than 
$100,000 or imprisoned not more than five years, or both, or if such 
funds, assets, or property are of a value of less than $100, shall be 
fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned for not more than one year, or 
both.
    (h) Claims adjustment authority. The Secretary shall have the 
authority to determine the amount of, to settle, and to adjust any claim 
arising under the Program, and to compromise or deny such claim or any 
part thereof. The Secretary shall also have the authority to waive such 
claims if the Secretary determines that to do so would serve the 
purposes of the Program. This provision shall not diminish the authority 
of the Attorney General of the United States under section 516 of title 
28, U.S. Code, to conduct litigation on behalf of the United States.
    (i) Special retroactivity provisions. Notwithstanding any other 
provisions contained in this part, the following shall apply:
    (1) State agencies shall provide reimbursement as set forth in 
Sec. 225.9(d)(10) of this part, for meal service provided by any 
academic-year NYSP sponsor between October 1, 1989 and the date of the 
Fiscal Year 1990 academic-year Program agreement between the State 
agency and the academic year NYSP sponsor under the following 
conditions, provided that:
    (i) The sponsor can document, for any meals claimed that:
    (A) The NYSP site participated in the Program during the 1989 SFSP 
or, if the site did not participate in the 1989 SFSP, free meal 
applications are on file to document the site's eligibility during the 
Fiscal Year 1990 academic-year phase of the SFSP;
    (B) Meal counts by type (breakfast, lunch, supplement, and supper) 
are available;
    (C) Food service revenue and expenditure records are sufficient to 
support the claim for reimbursement;
    (D) Program reimbursement does not duplicate other funding for the 
same meals;
    (E) The meals claimed for reimbursement met the requirements of the 
appropriate meal patterns set forth at Sec. 225.16(e) of this part in 
terms of items and quantities served; and
    (ii) The Fiscal Year 1990 academic-year Program agreement between 
the

[[Page 161]]

State agency and the academic-year NYSP sponsor is executed no later 
than 90 days after the publication of the 1990 Program regulations; and 
any claims for reimbursement for meals served between October 1, 1989 
and the date of said Program agreement are grouped by month and are 
received by the State agency no later than 30 days after the execution 
of the State-sponsor agreement or the date established by 
Sec. 225.9(d)(5), whichever date is later.

[54 FR 18208, Apr. 27, 1989, as amended at 55 FR 13471, Apr. 10, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 225.19  Regional office addresses.

    Persons desiring information concerning the Program may write to the 
appropriate State agency or Regional Office of FCS as indicated below:
    (a) In the States of Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New 
Hampshire, New York, Rhode Island, and Vermont: Northeast Regional 
Office, FCS, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 10 Causeway Street, Boston, 
MA 02222-1065.
    (b) In the States of Delaware, District of Columbia, Maryland, New 
Jersey, Pennsylvania, Puerto Rico, Virginia, Virgin Islands, and West 
Virginia: Mid-Atlantic Regional Office, FCS, U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Corporate Boulevard CN-02150, Trenton, NJ 08650.
    (c) In the States of Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, 
Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Tennessee: Southeast 
Regional Office, FCS, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 77 Forsyth Street, 
SW, Suite 112, Atlanta, GA 30303.
    (d) In the States of Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Ohio 
and Wisconsin: Midwest Regional Office, FCS, U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, 50 E. Washington Street, Chicago, IL 60602.
    (e) In the States of Arkansas, Louisiana, New Mexico, Oklahoma and 
Texas: Southwest Regional Office, FCS, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
1100 Commerce Street, Room 5-C-30, Dallas, TX 75242.
    (f) In the States of Colorado, Iowa, Kansas, Missouri, Montana, 
Nebraska, North Dakota, South Dakota, Utah and Wyoming: Mountain Plains 
Regional Office, FCS, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 1244 Speer 
Boulevard, Suite 903, Denver, CO 80204.
    (g) In the States of Alaska, American Samoa, Arizona, California, 
Guam, Hawaii, Idaho, Nevada, Oregon, Trust Territory of the Pacific 
Islands, the Northern Mariana Islands, and Washington: Western Regional 
Office, FCS, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 550 Kearney Street, Room 
400, San Francisco, CA 94108.

[54 FR 18208, Apr. 27, 1989, as amended at 55 FR 13471, Apr. 10, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 225.20  Information collection/recordkeeping--OMB assigned control numbers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Current OMB
       7 CFR section where requirements are described        control No.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
225.3-225.4................................................    0584-0280
225.6-225.10...............................................    0584-0280
225.12-225.13..............................................    0584-0280
225.15-225.18..............................................    0584-0280
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[61 FR 25554, May 22, 1996]

            Appendix A to Part 225--Alternate Foods for Meals

                       Vegetable Protein Products

    1. Schools, institutions, and service institutions may use a 
vegetable protein product, defined in paragraph 2, as a food component 
meeting the meal requirements specified in Sec. 210.10, Sec. 225.16 or 
Sec. 226.20 under the following terms and conditions:
    (a) The vegetable protein product must be prepared in combination 
with raw or cooked meat, poulty or seafood and shall resemble, as well 
as substitute in part for, one of these major protein foods. 
``Substitute'' refers to a vegetable protein product whose presence in 
another food results in the presence of a smaller amount of meat, 
poultry or seafood than is customarily expected or than appears to be 
present in that food. Examples of items in which a vegetable protein 
product may be used include, but are not limited to, beef patties, beef 
crumbles, pizza topping, meat loaf, meat sauce, taco filling, burritos, 
and tuna salad.
    (b) Vegetable protein products may be used in the dry form 
(nonhydrated), partially hydrated or fully hydrated form in combination 
with meat, poultry or seafood. The moisture content of the fully 
hydrated vegetable protein product shall be such that the mixture will 
have a minimum of 18 percent protein by weight or equivalent amount for 
the dry or partially hydrated form (based on the level that would be 
provided if the product were fully hydrated).
    (c) The quantity, by weight, of the fully hydrated vegetable protein 
product must not exceed 30 parts to 70 parts meat, poultry or

[[Page 162]]

seafood on an uncooked basis. The quantity by weight of the dry or 
partially hydrated vegetable protein product must not exceed a level 
equivalent to the amount (dry weight) used in the fully hydrated product 
at the 30 percent level of substitution. The dry or partially hydrated 
product's replacement of meat, poultry or seafood will be based on the 
level of substitution it would provide if it were fully hydrated.
    (d) A vegetable protein product may be used to satisfy the meat/meat 
alternative requirement when combined with meat, poultry or seafood and 
when it meets the other requirements of this section. The combination of 
the vegetable protein product and meat, poultry or seafood may meet all 
or part of the meat/meat alternate requirement specified in Sec. 210.10, 
Sec. 225.16 or Sec. 226.20.
    (e) The contribution vegetable protein products make toward the 
meat/meat alternate requirement specified in Sec. 210.10, Sec. 225.16, 
and Sec. 226.20 shall be determined on the basis of the preparation 
yield of the meat, poultry or seafood with which it is combined. When 
computing the preparation yield of a product containing meat, poultry or 
seafood and vegetable protein product, the vegetable protein product 
shall be evaluated as having the same preparation yield that is applied 
to the meat, poultry or seafood it replaces.
    (f) When vegetable protein products are served in a meal with other 
alternate food authorized in appendix A, each individual alternate food 
shall be used as specifically directed.
    2. A vegetable protein product to be used to resemble, and 
substitute in part for, meat, poultry or seafood, as specified in 
paragraph 1, must meet the following criteria:
    (a) The vegetable protein product (substitute food) shall contain 
one or more vegetable protein products which are defined as follows:
    (1) Vegetable (plant) protein products are foods which are processed 
so that some portion of the nonprotein constituents of the vegetable is 
removed. These vegetable protein products are safe and suitable edible 
products produced from vegetable (plant) sources including, but not 
limited to, soybeans, peanuts, wheat, and corn.
    (b) The types of vegetable protein products described in paragraph 
2(a)(1) of this appendix shall include flour, concentrate, and isolate 
as defined below:
    (1) When a product contains less than 65 percent protein by weight 
calculated on a moisture-free basis excluding added flavors, colors, or 
other added substances it is a ``________ flour'', the blank to be 
filled with the name of the source of the protein, e.g., ``soy'' or 
``peanut''.
    (2) When a product contains 65 percent or more but less than 90 
percent protein by weight calculated on a moisture-free basis excluding 
added flavors, colors, or other added substances, it is a ``________ 
protein concentrate'', the blank to be filled with the name of the 
source of the protein, e.g., ``soy'' or ``peanut''.
    (3) When a product contains 90 percent or more protein by weight 
calculated on a moisture-free basis excluding added flavors, colors or 
other added substances, it is a ``________ protein isolate'' or 
``________ isolated protein,'' the blank to be filled in with the name 
of the source of the protein, e.g., ``soy'' or ``peanut''.
    (c) Compliance with the moisture and protein provisions of paragraph 
2(b) (1), (2), and (3) of this appendix shall be determined by the 
appropriate methods described in ``Official Methods of Analysis of the 
Association of Official Analytical Chemists'' (14th edition, 1984).
    (d) Vegetable protein products which are used to resemble, and 
substitute in part for, meat, poultry or seafood shall be labeled in 
conformance with the following:
    (1) The common or usual names for a vegetable protein product used 
to resemble, and substitute in part for, meat, poultry or seafood shall 
include the term ``vegetable protein product'' and may include the term 
``textured'' or ``texturized'' and/or a term such as ``granules'' when 
such term is appropriate. The term ``plant'' may be used in the name in 
lieu of the term ``vegetable''; and
    (2) The vegetable protein products used as ingredients in the 
substitute food shall be listed by source (e.g, soy or peanut) and 
product type (e.g., flour, concentrate, isolate) in the ingredient state 
of the label. Product type(s) listed shall comply with the appropriate 
definition(s) set forth in paragraph 2(b) (1), (2) and (3), and may 
include a term which accurately describes the physical form of the 
product (e.g., ``granules'') when such term is appropriate.
    (e) Vegetable protein products which are used to resemble, and 
substitute in part for, meat, poultry or seafood shall meet the 
following nutritional specifications:
    (1) The biological quality of the protein in the vegetable protein 
product shall be at least 80 percent that of casein, such percentage to 
be determined by performing a Protein Efficiency Ratio (PER) assay 
unless FCS grants an exception to the PER by approving an alternate 
test;
    (2) The vegetable protein product shall contain at least 18 percent 
protein by weight when hydrated or formulated to be used in combination 
with meat, poultry or seafood. (``When hydrated or formulated'' refers 
to a dry vegetable protein product and the amount of water, fat or oil, 
colors, flavors or any other substances which have been added in order 
to make the resultant mixture resemble that meat, poultry or seafood);
    (3) The vegetable protein produce must contain the following levels 
of nutrients per gram of protein:

[[Page 163]]



------------------------------------------------------------------------
                          Nutrient                              Amount  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Vitamin A (IU)..............................................       13   
Thiamine (milligrams).......................................        0.02
Riboflavin (milligrams).....................................         .01
Niacin (milligrams).........................................         .3 
Panthothenic acid (milligrams)..............................         .04
Vitamin B6 (milligrams).....................................         .02
Vitamin B12 (micrograms)....................................         .1 
Iron (milligrams)...........................................         .15
Magnesium (milligrams)......................................        1.15
Zinc (milligrams)...........................................         .5 
Copper (micrograms).........................................       24   
Potassium (milligrams)......................................       17   
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (4) Compliance with the nutrient provisions set forth in paragraph 
2(e) (1), (2) and (3) of this appendix shall be determined by the 
appropriate methods described in ``Official Methods of Analysis of the 
Association of Official Analytical Chemists'' (latest edition).
    (f) Vegetable protein products to be used in the child nutrition 
programs to resemble, and substitute in part for, meat, poultry or 
seafood that comply with the labeling and nutritional specifications set 
forth in paragraph 2(d) (1) and (2) and paragraph 2(e) (1), (2) and (3) 
shall bear a label containing the following statement: ``This product 
meets USDA-FCS requirements for use in meeting a portion of the meat/
meat alternate requirement of the child nutrition programs.'' This 
statement shall appear on the principal display panel area of the 
package.
    (g) It is recommended that, for vegetable protein products to be 
used to resemble, and substitute in part for, meat, poultry or seafood 
and labeled as specified in paragraph 2(f) of this appendix, 
manufacturers provide information on the percent protein contained in 
the dry vegetable protein product (on an as is basis).
    (h) It is recommended that for a vegetable protein product mix, 
manufacturers provide information on (1) the amount by weight of dry 
vegetable protein product in the package, (2) hydration instructions, 
and (3) instructions on how to combine the mix with meat, poultry or 
seafood. A vegetable protein product mix is defined as a dry product 
containing vegetable protein products that comply with the labeling and 
nutritional specifications set forth in paragraphs 2(d) (1) and (2) and 
paragraph 2(e) (1), (2) and (3) along with substantial levels (more than 
5 percent) of seasonings, bread crumbs, flavorings, etc.
    3. Schools, institutions, and service institutions may use a 
commercially prepared meat, poultry or seafood product combined with 
vegetable protein products to meet all or part of the meat/meat 
alternate requirement specified in Sec. 210.10, Sec. 225.16 or 
Sec. 226.20 if the product bears a label containing the statement: 
``This item contains vegetable protein product(s) which is authorized as 
an alternate food in the child nutrition programs'' (outlined in 
paragraph 2 of this appendix). This would designate that the vegetable 
protein product used in the formulation of the meat, poultry or seafood 
item complies with the naming and nutritional specifications set forth 
in paragraph 2 of this appendix. The presence of this label does not 
ensure the proper level of hydration, ratio of substitution nor the 
contribution that the product makes toward meal pattern requirements for 
the child nutrition programs.

                   Appendix B to Part 225--[Reserved]

      Appendix C to Part 225--Child Nutrition (CN) Labeling Program

    1. The Child Nutrition (CN) Labeling Program is a voluntary 
technical assistance program administered by the Food and Consumer 
Service (FCS) in conjunction with the Food Safety and Inspection Service 
(FSIS) and Agricultural Marketing Service (AMS) of the U.S. Department 
of Agriculture (USDA), and National Marine Fisheries Service of the U.S. 
Department of Commerce (USDC) for the Child Nutrition Programs. This 
program essentially involves the review of a manufacturer's recipe or 
product formulation to determine the contribution a serving of a 
commercially prepared product makes toward meal pattern requirements and 
a review of the CN label statement to ensure its accuracy. CN labeled 
products must be produced in accordance with all requirements set forth 
in this rule.
    2. Products eligible for CN labels are as follows:
    (a) Commercially prepared food products that contribute 
significantly to the meat/meat alternate component of meal pattern 
requirements of 7 CFR 210.10, 225.16, and 226.20 and are served in the 
main dish.
    (b) Juice drinks and juice drink products that contain a minimum of 
50 percent full strength juice by volume.
    3. For the purpose of this appendix the following definitions apply:
    (a) CN label is a food product label that contains a CN label 
statement and CN logo as defined in paragraph 3(b) and (c) below.
    (b) The CN logo (as shown below) is a distinct border which is used 
around the edges of a ``CN label statement'' as defined in paragraph 
3(c).

[[Page 164]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC17SE91.006


    (c) The CN label statement includes the following:
    (1) The product identification number (assigned by FCS);
    (2) The statement of the product's contribution toward meal pattern 
requirements of 7 CFR 210.10, 220.8, 225.16, and 226.20. The statement 
shall identify the contribution of a specific portion of a meat/meat 
alternate product toward the meat/meat alternate, bread/bread alternate, 
and/or vegetable/fruit component of the meal pattern requirements. For 
juice drinks and juice drink products the statement shall identify their 
contribution toward the vegetable/fruit component of the meal pattern 
requirements.
    (3) Statement specifying that the use of the CN logo and CN 
statement was authorized by FCS, and
    (4) The approval date.
    For example:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC17SE91.007
    
    (d) Federal inspection means inspection of food products by FSIS, 
AMS or USDC.
    4. Food processors or manufacturers may use the CN label statement 
and CN logo as defined in paragraph 3 (b) and (c) under the following 
terms and conditions:
    (a) The CN label must be reviewed and approved at the national level 
by the Food and Consumer Service and appropriate USDA or USDC Federal 
agency responsible for the inspection of the product.
    (b) The CN labeled product must be produced under Federal inspection 
by USDA or USDC. The Federal inspection must be performed in accordance 
with an approved partial or total quality control program or standards 
established by the appropriate Federal inspection service.
    (c) The CN label statement must be printed as an integral part of 
the product label along with the product name, ingredient listing, the 
inspection shield or mark for the appropriate inspection program, the 
establishment number where appropriate and the manufacturer's or 
distributor's name and address.
    (1) The inspection marking for CN labeled non-meat, non-poultry, and 
non-seafood products with the exception of juice drinks and juice drink 
products is established as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC17SE91.008

    (d) Yields for determining the product's contribution toward meal 
pattern requirements must be calculated using the Food Buying Guide for 
Child Nutrition Programs (Program Aid Number 1331).
    5. In the event a company uses the CN logo and CN label statement 
inappropriately, the company will be directed to discontinue the use of 
the logo and statement and the matter will be referred to the 
appropriate agency for action to be taken against the company.
    6. Products that bear a CN label statement as set forth in paragraph 
3(c) carry a warranty. This means that if a food service authority 
participating in the child nutrition programs purchases a CN labeled 
product and uses it in accordance with the manufacturer's directions, 
the school or institution will not have an audit claim filed against it 
for the CN labeled product for noncompliance with the meal pattern 
requirements of

[[Page 165]]

7 CFR 210.10, 220.8, 225.16, and 226.20. If a State or Federal auditor 
finds that a product that is CN labeled does not actually meet the meal 
pattern requirements claimed on the label, the auditor will report this 
finding to FCS. FCS will prepare a report on the findings and send it to 
the appropriate divisions of FSIS and AMS of the USDA, National Marine 
Fisheries Service of the USDC, Food and Drug Administration, or the 
Department of Justice for action against the company. Any or all of the 
following courses of action may be taken: (a) The company's CN label may 
be revoked for a specific period of time; (b) The appropriate agency may 
pursue a misbranding or mislabeling action against the company producing 
the product; (c) The company's name will be circulated to regional FCS 
offices; and (d) FCS will require the food service program involved to 
notify the State agency of the labeling violation.
    7. FCS is authorized to issue operational policies, procedures, and 
instructions for the CN Labeling Program. To apply for a CN label and to 
obtain additional information on CN label application procedures, write 
to: CN Labels, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Consumer 
Service, Nutrition and Technical Services Division, 3101 Park Center 
Drive, Alexandria, Virginia 22302.


<R03>
PART 226--CHILD AND ADULT CARE FOOD PROGRAM--Table of Contents

<R05>


                           Subpart A--General

Sec.
226.1  General purpose and scope.
226.2  Definitions.
226.3  Administration.

                     Subpart B--Assistance to States

226.4  Payments to States and use of funds.
226.5  Donation of commodities.

                   Subpart C--State Agency Provisions

226.6  State agency administrative responsibilities.
226.7  State agency responsibilities for financial management.
226.8  Audits.

                      Subpart D--Payment Provisions

226.9  Assignment of rates of reimbursement for centers.
226.10  Program payment procedures.
226.11  Program payments for child care centers, adult day care centers 
          and outside-school-hours care centers.
226.12  Administrative payments to sponsoring organizations for day care 
          homes.
226.13  Food service payments to sponsoring organizations for day care 
          homes.
226.14  Claims against institutions.

                    Subpart E--Operational Provisions

226.15  Institution provisions.
226.16  Sponsoring organization provisions.
226.17  Child care center provisions.
226.18  Day care home provisions.
226.19  Outside-school-hours care center provisions.
226.19a  Adult day care center provisions.
226.20  Requirements for meals.
226.21  Food service management companies.
226.22  Procurement standards.
226.23  Free and reduced-price meals.

              Subpart F--Food Service Equipment Provisions

226.24  Property management requirements.

                       Subpart G--Other Provisions

226.25  Other provisions.
226.26  Program information.
226.27  Information collection/recordkeeping--OMB assigned control 
          numbers.

Appendix A to Part 226--Alternate Foods for Meals
Appendix B to Part 226--[Reserved]
Appendix C to Part 226--Child Nutrition (CN) Labeling Program

    Authority: Secs. 9, 11, 14, 16, and 17, National School Lunch Act, 
as amended (42 U.S.C. 1758, 1759a, 1762a, 1765 and 1766).

    Source: 47 FR 36527, Aug. 20, 1982, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                           Subpart A--General


<R05>
Sec. 226.1  General purpose and scope.

    This part announces the regulations under which the Secretary of 
Agriculture will carry out the Child and Adult Care Food Program. 
Section 17 of the National School Lunch Act, as amended, authorizes 
assistance to States through grants-in-aid and other means to initiate, 
maintain, and expand nonprofit food service programs for children or 
adult participants in nonresidential institutions which provide care. 
The Program is intended to enable such institutions to integrate a 
nutritious food service with organized care services for enrolled 
participants. Payments will be made to State agencies or FCS Regional 
Offices to enable them to reimburse institutions for food service to 
enrolled participants.

[53 FR 52587, Dec. 28, 1988, as amended by Amdt. 22, 55 FR 1377, Jan. 
14, 1990]

[[Page 166]]


<R05>
Sec. 226.2  Definitions.

    AFDC assistance unit means any individual or group of individuals 
which is currently certified to receive assistance under the Aid to 
Families with Dependent Children Program in a State where the standard 
of eligibility for AFDC benefits does not exceed the income eligibility 
guidelines for free meals under this part.
    Act means the National School Lunch Act, as amended.
    Administrative costs means costs incurred by an institution related 
to planning, organizing, and managing a food service under the Program, 
and allowed by the State agency financial management instruction.
    Adult means, for the purposes of the collection of social security 
numbers as a condition of eligibility for free or reduced-price meals, 
any individual 21 years of age or older.
    Adult day care center means any public or private nonprofit 
organization or any proprietary title XIX or title XX center (as defined 
in this section) which (a) is licensed or approved by Federal, State or 
local authorities to provide nonresidential adult day care services to 
functionally impaired adults (as defined in this section) or persons 60 
years of age or older in a group setting outside their homes on a less 
than 24-hour basis and (b) provides for such care and services directly 
or under arrangements made by the agency or organization whereby the 
agency or organization maintains professional management responsibility 
for all such services. Such centers shall provide a structured, 
comprehensive program that provides a variety of health, social and 
related support services to enrolled adult participants through an 
individual plan of care.
    Adult day care facility means a licensed or approved adult day care 
center under the auspices of a sponsoring organization.
    Adult participant means a person enrolled in an adult day care 
center who is functionally impaired (as defined in this section) or 60 
years of age or older.
    Advanced payments means financial assistance made available to an 
institution for its Program costs prior to the month in which such costs 
will be incurred.
    CACFP child care standards means the Child and Adult Care Food 
Program child care standards developed by the Department for alternate 
approval of child care centers, outside-school-hours care centers, and 
day care homes by the State agency under the provisions of 
Sec. 226.6(d)(2) and (3).
    Child care center means any public or private nonprofit 
organization, or any proprietary title XX center, as defined in this 
section (``Proprietary title XX center''), licensed or approved to 
provide nonresidential child care services to enrolled children, 
primarily of preschool age, including but not limited to day care 
centers, settlement houses, neighborhood centers, Head Start centers and 
organizations providing day care services for handicapped children. 
Child care centers may participate in the Program as independent centers 
or under the auspices of a sponsoring organization.
    Child care facility means a licensed or approved child care center, 
day care home, or outside-school-hours care center under the auspices of 
a sponsoring organization.
    Children means (a) persons 12 years of age and under, (b) children 
of migrant workers 15 years of age and under, and (c) mentally or 
physically handicapped persons, as defined by the State, enrolled in an 
institution or a child care facility serving a majority of persons 18 
years of age and under.
    Claiming percentage means the ratio of the number of enrolled 
participants in an institution in each reimbursement category (free, 
reduced-price or paid) to the total of enrolled participants in the 
institution.
    Current income means income received during the month prior to 
application for free or reduced-price meals. If such income does not 
accurately reflect the household's annual income, income shall be based 
on the projected annual household income. If the prior year's income 
provides an accurate reflection of the household's current annual 
income, the prior year may be used as a base for the projected annual 
income.
    Day care home means an organized nonresidential child care program 
for children enrolled in a private home, licensed or approved as a 
family or group

[[Page 167]]

day care home and under the auspices of a sponsoring organization.
    Department means the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
    Documentation means (a) the completion of the following information 
on a free and reduced-price application:
    (1) names of all household members;
    (2) income received by each household member, identified by source 
of income (such as earnings, wages, welfare, pensions, support payments, 
unemployment compensation, social security and other cash income);
    (3) the signature of an adult household member; and
    (4) the social security number of the adult household member who 
signs the application, or an indication that he/she does not possess a 
social security number; or
    (b) For a child who is a member of a food stamp household or an AFDC 
assistance unit, ``documentation'' means the completion of only the 
following information on a free and reduced-price application:
    (1) the name(s) and appropriate food stamp or AFDC case number(s) 
for the child(ren); and
    (2) the signature of an adult member of the household; or
    (c) For an adult participant who is a member of a food stamp 
household or is an SSI or Medicaid participant, as defined in this 
section, ``documentation'' means the completion of only the following 
information on a free and reduced- price application:
    (1) the name(s) and appropriate food stamp case number(s) for the 
participant(s) or the adult participant's SSI or Medicaid identification 
number, as defined in this section; and
    (2) the signature of an adult member of the household.
    Enrolled child means a child whose parent or guardian has submitted 
to an institution a signed document which indicates that the child is 
enrolled for child care.
    Enrolled participant means an ``Enrolled child'' (as defined in this 
section) or ``Adult participant'' (as defined in this section).
    Family means, in the case of children, a group of related or 
nonrelated individuals, who are not residents of an institution or 
boarding house, but who are living as one economic unit or, in the case 
of adult participants, the adult participant, and if residing with the 
adult participant, the spouse and dependent(s) of the adult participant.
    Fiscal Year means a period of 12 calendar months beginning October 1 
of any year and ending with September 30 of the following year.
    FCS means the Food and Consumer Service of the Department.
    FCSRO means the appropriate Regional Office of the Food and Consumer 
Service.
    Food service equipment assistance means Federal financial assistance 
formerly made available to State agencies to assist institutions in the 
purchase or rental of equipment to enable institutions to establish, 
maintain or expand food service under the Program.
    Food service management company means an organization other than a 
public or private nonprofit school, with which an institution may 
contract for preparing and, unless otherwise provided for, delivering 
meals, with or without milk for use in the Program.
    Food Stamp household means any individual or group of individuals 
which is currently certified to receive assistance as a household under 
the Food Stamp Program.
    Free meal means a meal served under the Program to (a) a participant 
from a family which meets the income standards for free school meals, or 
to (b) a child who is automatically eligible for free meals by virtue of 
food stamp or AFDC recipiency, or to (c) an adult participant who is 
automatically eligible for free meals by virtue of food stamp recipiency 
or is a SSI or Medicaid participant. Regardless of whether the 
participant qualified for free meals by virtue of (a), (b) or (c), 
neither the participant nor any member of their family shall be required 
to pay or to work in the food service program in order to receive a free 
meal.
    Functionally impaired adult means chronically impaired disabled 
persons 18 years of age or older, including victims of Alzheimer's 
disease and related disorders with neurological and organic brain 
dysfunction, who are physically or mentally impaired to the extent that 
their capacity for independence and their ability to carry out 
activities

[[Page 168]]

of daily living is markedly limited. Activities of daily living include, 
but are not limited to, adaptive activities such as cleaning, shopping, 
cooking, taking public transportation, maintaining a residence, caring 
appropriately for one's grooming or hygiene, using telephones and 
directories, or using a post office. Marked limitations refer to the 
severity of impairment, and not the number of limited activities, and 
occur when the degree of limitation is such as to seriously interfere 
with the ability to function independently.
    Household means ``family'', as defined in Sec. 226.2 (``Family'').
    Income standards means the family-size and income standards 
prescribed annually by the Secretary for determining eligibility for 
free and reduced-price meals under the National School Lunch Program and 
the School Breakfast Program.
    Income to the program means any funds used in an institution's food 
service program, including, but not limited to all monies, other than 
Program payments, received from other Federal, State, intermediate, or 
local government sources; participant's payments for meals and food 
service fees; income from any food sales to adults; and other income, 
including cash donations or grants from organizations or individuals.
    Independent center means a child care center, outside-school-hours 
care center or adult day care center which enters into an agreement with 
the State agency to assume final administrative and financial 
responsibility for Program operations.
    Infant cereal means any iron-fortified dry cereal specially 
formulated for and generally recognized as cereal for infants that is 
routinely mixed with formula or milk prior to consumption.
    Infant formula means any iron-fortified infant formula, intended for 
dietary use as a sole source of food for normal, healthy infants served 
in liquid state at manufacturer's recommended dilution.
    Institution means a sponsoring organization, child care center, 
outside-school-hours care center or adult day care center which enters 
into an agreement with the State agency to assume final administrative 
and financial responsibility for Program operations.
    Key Element Reporting System (KERS) means a comprehensive national 
system for reporting critical key element performance data on the 
operation of the program in institutions.
    Meals means food which is served to enrolled participants at an 
institution, child care facility or adult day care facility and which 
meets the nutritional requirements set forth in this part.
    Medicaid participant means an adult participant who receives 
assistance under title XIX of the Social Security Act, the Grant to 
States for Medical Assistance Programs--Medicaid.
    Milk means pasteurized fluid types of unflavored or whole flavored 
milk, lowfat milk, skim milk, or cultured buttermilk which meet State 
and local standards for such milk except that, in the meal pattern for 
infants (8 months up to 1 year of age), ``milk'' means unflavored whole 
fluid milk or an equivalent quantity of reconstituted evaporated milk 
which meets such standards. In Alaska, Hawaii, American Samoa, Guam, 
Puerto Rico, the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, the Northern 
Mariana Islands, and the Virgin Islands if a sufficient supply of such 
types of fluid milk cannot be obtained, ``milk'' shall include 
reconstituted or recombined milk. All milk should contain vitamins A and 
D at levels specified by the Food and Drug Administration and be 
consistent with State and local standards for such milk.
    Nonpricing program means an institution in which there is no 
separate identifiable charge made for meals served to participants.
    Nonprofit food service means all food service operations conducted 
by the institution principally for the benefit of enrolled participants, 
from which all of the Program reimbursement funds are used solely for 
the operations or improvement of such food service.
    Nonresidential means that the same participants are not maintained 
in care for more than 24 hours on a regular basis.
    OIG means the Office of the Inspector General of the Department.
    Operating costs means expenses incurred by an institution in serving

[[Page 169]]

meals to participants under the Program, and allowed by the State agency 
financial management instruction.
    Outside-school-hours care center means a public or private nonprofit 
organization, or a proprietary title XX center, as defined in this 
section (``Proprietary title XX center''), licensed or approved to 
provide organized nonresidential child care services to enrolled 
children outside of school hours. Outside-school-hours care centers may 
participate in the Program as independent centers or under the auspices 
of a sponsoring organization.
    Participants means ``Children'' or ``Adult participants'' as defined 
in this section.
    Personal property means property of any kind except real property. 
It may be tangible--having physical existence--or intangible--having no 
physical existence such as patents, inventions, and copyrights.
    Pricing program means an institution in which a separate 
identifiable charge is made for meals served to participants.
    Program means the Child and Adult Care Food Program authorized by 
section 17 of the National School Lunch Act, as amended.
    Program payments means financial assistance in the form of start-up 
payments, advance payments, or reimbursement paid or payable to 
institutions for operating costs and administrative costs.
    Proprietary title XIX center means any private, for profit center 
(a) providing nonresidential adult day care services for which it 
receives compensation from amounts granted to the States under title XIX 
of the Social Security Act and (b) in which title XIX beneficiaries were 
not less than 25 percent of enrolled eligible participants in the 
calendar month preceding initial application or annual reapplication for 
Program participation.
    Proprietary Title XX center means any private, for profit center (a) 
providing nonresidential child or adult day care services for which it 
receives compensation from amounts granted to the States under title XX 
of the Social Security Act and (b) in which title XX beneficiaries were 
not less than 25 percent of enrolled eligible participants during the 
calendar month preceding initial application or annual reapplication for 
Program participation.
    Reduced-price meal means a meal served under the Program to a 
participant from a family which meets the income standards for reduced-
price school meals. Any separate charge imposed shall be less than the 
full price of the meal, but in no case more than 40 cents for a lunch or 
supper, 30 cents for a breakfast, and 15 cents for a supplement, and for 
which neither the participant nor any member of his family is required 
to work in the food service program.
    Reimbursement means Federal financial assistance paid or payable to 
institutions for Program costs within the rates assigned by the State 
agency.
    SSI participant means an adult participant who receives assistance 
under title XVI of the Social Security Act, the Supplemental Security 
Income (SSI) for the Aged, Blind and Disabled Program.
    School year means a period of 12 calendar months beginning July 1 of 
any year and ending June 30 of the following year.
    Sponsoring organization means a public or nonprofit private 
organization which is entirely responsible for the administration of the 
food program in: (a) One or more day care homes; (b) a child care 
center, outside-school-hours care centers, or adult day care center 
which is a legally distinct entity from the sponsoring organization; (c) 
two or more child care centers, outside-school-hours care centers, or 
adult day care centers; or (d) any combination of child care centers, 
adult day care centers, day care homes, and outside-school-hours care 
centers. The term ``sponsoring organization'' also includes a for-profit 
organization which is entirely responsible for administration of the 
Program in any combination of two or more child care centers, adult day 
care centers and outside-school-hours care centers which are part of the 
same legal entity as the sponsoring organization, and which are 
proprietary title XIX or XX centers, as defined in this section 
(``Proprietary Title XIX center'', ``Proprietary Title XX center'').

[[Page 170]]

    Start-up payments'' means financial assistance made available to a 
sponsoring organization for its administrative expenses associated with 
developing or expanding a food service program in day care homes and 
initiating successful Program operations.
    State means any of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, the 
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, 
the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, and the Northern Mariana 
Islands.
    State agency means the State educational agency or any other State 
agency that has been designated by the Governor or other appropriate 
executive, or by the legislative authority of the State, and has been 
approved by the Department to administer the Program within the State or 
in States in which FCS administers the Program, FCSRO.
    Title XVI means Title XVI of the Social Security Act which 
authorizes the Supplemental Security Income for the Aged, Blind, and 
Disabled Program--SSI.
    Title XIX means Title XIX of the Social Security Act which 
authorizes the Grants to States for Medical Assistance Programs--
Medicaid.
    Title XX means Title XX of the Social Security Act.
    Uniform Federal Assistance Regulations means the Department's 
regulations, 7 CFR part 3015, establishing Department-wide policies and 
standards for administration of grants and cooperative agreements.
    Verification means a review of the information reported by 
institutions to the State agency regarding the eligibility of 
participants for free or reduced-price meals, and, in addition, for a 
pricing program, confirmation of eligibility for free or reduced-price 
benefits under the program. Verification for a pricing program shall 
include confirmation of income eligibility and, at State discretion, any 
other information required on the application which is defined as 
documentation in Sec. 226.2. Such verification may be accomplished by 
examining information (e.g., wage stubs, etc.) provided by the household 
or other sources of information as specified in Sec. 226.23(h)(2)(iv). 
However, if a food stamp or AFDC case number is provided for a child, 
verification for such child shall include only confirmation that the 
child is included in a currently certified food stamp household or AFDC 
assistance unit; or, for an adult participant, if a food stamp case 
number or SSI or Medicaid assistance identification number is provided, 
verification for such participant shall include only confirmation that 
the participant is included in a currently certified food stamp 
household or is a current SSI or Medicaid participant.
    Yogurt means commercially coagulated milk products obtained by the 
fermentation of specific bacteria, that meet milk fat or milk solid 
requirements to which flavoring foods or ingredients may be added. These 
products are covered by the Food and Drug Administration's Standard of 
Identity for yogurt, lowfat yogurt, and nonfat yogurt, (21 CFR 131.200), 
(21 CFR 131.203), (21 CFR 131.206), respectively.

[47 FR 36527, Aug. 20, 1982; 47 FR 46072, Oct. 15, 1982, as amended at 
48 FR 21529, May 13, 1983; 48 FR 41142, Sept. 14, 1983; 50 FR 19310, May 
8, 1985; 51 FR 31316, Sept. 3, 1986; 52 FR 36906, Oct. 2, 1987; 53 FR 
52587, Dec. 28, 1988; 54 FR 27153, June 28, 1989; Amdt. 22, 55 FR 1377, 
Jan. 14, 1990; 61 FR 25554, May 22, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 226.3  Administration.

    (a) Within the Department, FCS shall act on behalf of the Department 
in the administration of the Program.
    (b) Within the States, responsibility for the administration of the 
Program shall be in the State agency, except that if FCS has 
continuously administered the Program in any State since October 1, 
1980, FCS shall continue to administer the Program in that State. A 
State in which FCS administers the Program may, upon request to FCS, 
assume administration of the Program.
    (c) Each State agency desiring to take part in the Program shall 
enter into a written agreement with the Department for the 
administration of the Program in the State in accordance with the 
provisions of this part. This agreement shall cover the operation of the 
Program during the period specified therein and may be extended by 
consent of both parties.
    (d) FCSRO shall, in each State in which it administers the Program, 
have available all funds and assume all

[[Page 171]]

responsibilities of a State agency as set forth in this part.


<R04>
                     Subpart B--Assistance to States


<R05>
Sec. 226.4  Payments to States and use of funds.

    (a) Availability of funds. For each fiscal year based on funds 
provided to the Department, FCS shall make funds available to each State 
agency to reimburse institutions for their costs in connection with food 
service operations, including administrative expenses, under this part. 
Funds shall be made available in an amount no less than the sum of the 
totals obtained under paragraphs (b), (c), (d), (e) and (h) of this 
section. However, in any fiscal year, the aggregate amount of assistance 
provided to a State under this part shall not exceed the sum of the 
Federal funds provided by the State to participating institutions within 
the State for that fiscal year and any funds used by the State under 
paragraphs (h) and (j) of this section.
    (b) Center funds. For meals served to participants in child care 
centers, adult day care centers and outside-school-hours care centers, 
funds shall be made available to each State agency in an amount no less 
than the sum of the products obtained by multiplying:
    (1) The number of breakfasts served in the Program within the State 
to participants from families that do not satisfy the eligibilty 
standards for free and reduced-price school meals enrolled in 
institutions by the national average payment rate for breakfasts for 
such participants under section 4 of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966;
    (2) The number of breakfasts served in the Program within the State 
to participants from families that satisfy the eligibilty standards for 
free school meals enrolled in institutions by the national average 
payment rate for free breakfasts under section 4 of the Child Nutrition 
Act of 1966;
    (3) The number of breakfasts served to participants from families 
that satisfy the eligibilty standard for reduced-price school meals 
enrolled in institutions by the national average payment rate for 
reduced-price school breakfasts under section 4 of the Child Nutrition 
Act of 1966;
    (4) The number of lunches and suppers served in the Program within 
the State by the national average payment rate for lunches under section 
4 of the National School Lunch Act. (All lunches and suppers served in 
the State are funded under this provision);
    (5) The number of lunches and suppers served in the Program within 
the State to participants from families that satisfy the eligibilty 
standard for free school meals enrolled in institutions by the national 
average payment rate for free lunches under section 11 of the National 
School Lunch Act;
    (6) The number of lunches and suppers served in the Program within 
the State to participants from families that satisfy the eligibilty 
standard for reduced-price school meals enrolled in institutions by the 
national average payment rate for reduced-price lunches under section 11 
of the National School Lunch Act;
    (7) The number of supplements served in the Program within the State 
to participants from families that do not satisfy the eligibilty 
standards for free and reduced-price school meals enrolled in 
institutions by 2.75 cents;
    (8) The number of supplements served in the Program within the State 
to participants from families that satisfy the eligibilty standard for 
free school meals enrolled in institutions by 30 cents;
    (9) The number of supplements served in the Program within the State 
to participants from families that satisfy the eligibilty standard for 
reduced-price school meals enrolled in institutions by 15 cents.
    (c) Day care home funds. For meals served to children in day care 
homes, funds shall be made available to each State agency in an amount 
no less than the sum of products obtained by multiplying:
    (1) The number of breakfasts served in the Program within the State 
by 47.75 cents;
    (2) The number of lunches and suppers served in the Program within 
the State by 93.5 cents;
    (3) The number of supplements served in the Program within the State 
by 28 cents.
    (d) Administrative funds. For administrative payments to day care 
home

[[Page 172]]

sponsoring organizations, funds shall be made available to each State 
agency in an amount not less than the product obtained each month by 
multiplying the number of day care homes participating under each 
sponsoring organization within the State by the applicable rates 
specified in Sec. 226.12(a)(3).
    (e) Start-up funds. For start-up payments to eligible sponsoring 
organizations, funds shall be made available to each State agency in an 
amount equal to the total amount of start-up payments made in the most 
recent period for which reports are available for that State or on the 
basis of estimates by FCS.
    (f) Funding assurance. FCS shall ensure that, to the extent funds 
are appropriated, each State has sufficient Program funds available for 
providing start-up and advance payments in accordance with this part.
    (g) Rate adjustments. FCS shall publish a notice in the Federal 
Register to announce each rate adjustment. FCS shall adjust the 
following rates on the specified dates:
    (1) The rates for meals served in day care homes shall be adjusted 
annually, on July 1, on the basis of changes in the series for food away 
from home of the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers published 
by the Department of Labor. Such adjustments shall be made to the 
nearest $.0025 based on changes measured over the most recent twelve-
month period for which data are available.
    (2) The rate for supplements served in child care centers, adult day 
care centers and outside-school-hours care centers shall be adjusted 
annually, on July 1, on the basis of changes in the series for food away 
from home of the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers published 
by the Department of Labor. Such adjustments shall be made to the 
nearest $.0025 based on changes measured over the most recent twelve-
month period for which data are available.
    (3) The rate for administrative payments to day care home sponsoring 
organizations shall be adjusted annually, on July 1, on the basis of 
changes in the series for all items of the Consumer Price Index for All 
Urban Consumers published by the Department of Labor. Such adjustments 
shall be made to the nearest dollar based on changes measured over the 
most recent twelve-month period for which data are available.
    (h) Audit funds. For the expense of conducting audits and reviews 
under Sec. 226.8, funds shall be made available to each State agency in 
an amount equal to two percent of the Program reimbursement provided to 
institutions within the State during the second fiscal year preceding 
the fiscal year for which these funds are to be made available. The 
amount of assistance provided to a State under this paragraph in any 
fiscal year may not exceed the State's expenditures under Sec. 226.8 
during such fiscal year.
    (i) Method of funding. FCS shall authorize funds for State agencies 
in accordance with the Uniform Federal Assistance Regulations.
    (j) Special developmental projects. The State agency may use in 
carrying out special developmental projects an amount not to exceed one 
percent of Program funds used in the second prior fiscal year. Special 
developmental projects shall conform to FCS guidance and be approved in 
writing by FCS.

[47 FR 36527, Aug. 20, 1982, as amended at 52 FR 36906, Oct. 2, 1987; 53 
FR 52588, Dec. 28, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 226.5  Donation of commodities.

    (a) USDA foods available under section 6 of this Act, section 416 of 
the Agricultural Act of 1949 (7 U.S.C. 1431) or purchased under section 
32 of the Act of August 24, 1935 (7 U.S.C. 1431), section 709 of the 
Food and Agriculture Act of 1965 (7 U.S.C. 1446a-1), or other authority, 
and donated by the Department shall be made available to each State.
    (b) The value of such commodities (or cash-in-lieu of commodities) 
donated to each State for each school year shall be, at a minimum, the 
amount obtained by multiplying the number of lunches and suppers served 
in participating institutions, other than sponsoring organizations for 
day care homes which are not receiving commodities, in that State during 
that school year by the rate for commodities or cash-in-lieu thereof 
established

[[Page 173]]

for that school year under the provisions of section 6(e) of this Act.


<R04>
                   Subpart C--State Agency Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 226.6  State agency administrative responsibilities.

    (a) State agency personnel. Each State agency shall provide 
sufficient consultative, technical and managerial personnel to 
administer the Program, provide sufficient training and technical 
assistance to institutions and monitor performance to facilitate 
expansion and effective operation of the Program.
    (b) Application approval. Each State agency shall establish an 
application procedure to determine the eligibility under this part of 
applicant institutions, and facilities for which applications are 
submitted by sponsoring organizations. State agencies, by written 
consent of the State agency and the institutions, shall renew agreements 
with institutions not less frequently than annually. A State agency may 
not execute an agreement to be effective during two fiscal years but may 
nevertheless establish an ongoing renewal process for the purpose of 
reviewing and approving applications from participating institutions 
throughout the fiscal year. As a minimum, such application approval 
process shall include:
    (1) Renewal of the Program agreement;
    (2) For child care centers, adult day care centers and outside-
school-hours care centers, submission of current eligibility information 
on enrolled participants.
    (3) For sponsoring organizations of day care homes, submission of 
the current total number of children enrolled, and an assurance that day 
care home providers' children enrolled in the Program are eligible for 
free or reduced-price meals;
    (4) Issuance of a nondiscrimination policy statement and media 
release;
    (5) For sponsoring organizations, submission of a management plan;
    (6) Submission of an administrative budget;
    (7) Submission of documentation that all child care centers, adult 
day care centers, outside-school-hours care centers, and day care homes 
for which application is made are in compliance with Program licensing/
approval provisions;
    (8) For proprietary Title XIX or Title XX centers, submission of 
documentation that they are currently providing nonresidential day care 
services for which they receive compensation under title XIX or title XX 
of the Social Security Act, and certification that not less than 25 
percent of enrolled participants in each such center during the most 
recent calendar month were title XIX or title XX beneficiaries;
    (9) Statement of institutional preference to receive commodities or 
cash-in-lieu of commodities;
    (10) Institutional choice to receive all, part, or none of advance 
payment. Any institution applying for participation in the Program shall 
be notified of approval or disapproval by the State agency in writing 
within 30 calendar days of filing a complete and correct application. If 
an institution submits an incomplete application, the State agency shall 
notify the institution within 15 calendar days of receipt of the 
application and shall provide technical assistance, if necessary, to the 
institution for the purpose of completing its application. Any 
disapproved applicant shall be notified of its right to appeal under 
paragraph (j) of this section.
    (c) Denial of applications and termination of institutions. The 
State agency shall not enter into an agreement with any applicant 
institution which the State agency determines to have been seriously 
deficient at any time in its operation of any Federal child nutrition 
program. However, the State agency may enter into an agreement with such 
an institution when with FCS concurrence it determines that the 
deficiencies have been corrected. The State agency shall terminate the 
program agreement with any institution which it determines to be 
seriously deficient. However, the State agency shall afford an 
institution every reasonable opportunity to correct problems before 
terminating the institution for being seriously deficient. The State 
agency shall notify FCS whenever it has denied an application from or 
terminated the participation of a seriously deficient institution. This 
notification shall be made within 15 days of

[[Page 174]]

the review official's decision upholding the State's action or, if the 
institution elects not to appeal the decision, within 15 days of the 
expiration of the appeal right. FCS will maintain a list of these 
institutions and will notify all other State agencies of these 
institutions' ineligibility to participate in the program. FCS may 
determine independently that an institution has been seriously deficient 
in its operation of any Federal child nutrition program and include such 
institution on the list of ineligible institutions if appropriate 
corrective action is not taken. State agencies shall not enter into an 
agreement with any institution included on this list of ineligible 
institutions and shall terminate any participating institution included 
on the list within 30 days of the receipt of notification by FCS of the 
institution's ineligible status. Once included on this list, an 
institution shall be ineligible to participate in the program until such 
time as FCS, in consultation with the appropriate State agency, 
determines that the serious deficiency which resulted in the ineligible 
status has been corrected. Any institution which is identifiable with a 
seriously deficient institution through its corporate organization, 
officers, employees, or otherwise shall also be considered to be 
ineligible unless it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the State 
agency, with FCS concurrence, that good cause exists for considering the 
institution distinct from the seriously deficient institution. Denial or 
termination actions taken on the basis of FCS notification of ineligible 
status shall not be subject to administrative review as provided in 
Sec. 226.6(k). However, an institution which FCS has determined to be 
seriously deficient and which has not taken acceptable corrective action 
may request an administrative review of this determination by an FCS 
review official in accordance with the appeal procedures set forth in 
Sec. 226.6(k) and will not be included on the list of ineligible 
institutions unless FCS' determination is upheld by the review official. 
Serious deficiencies, which are grounds for disapproval of applications 
and for termination include, but are not limited to, any of the 
following:
    (1) Noncompliance with the applicable bid procedures and contract 
requirements of Federal child nutrition program regulations;
    (2) The submission of false information to the State agency;
    (3) Failure to return to the State agency any advance payments which 
exceeded the amount earned for serving eligible meals, or failure to 
return disallowed start-up payments;
    (4) Failure to maintain adequate records;
    (5) Failure to adjust meal orders to conform to variations in the 
number of participants;
    (6) The claiming of Program payments for meals not served to 
participants;
    (7) Service of a significant number of meals which did not include 
required quantities of all meal components;
    (8) Continued use of food service management companies that are in 
violation of health codes;
    (9) Failure of a sponsoring organization to disburse payments to its 
facilities in accordance with its management plan;
    (10) A history of administrative or financial mismanagement in any 
Federal child nutrition program;
    (11) The claiming of Program payment for meals served by a 
proprietary title XIX or title XX center during a calendar month in 
which less than 25 percent of enrolled participants were title XIX or 
title XX beneficiaries.
    (d) Licensing/approval for child care centers, outside-school-hours 
care centers and day care homes. This section prescribes State agency 
responsibilities to ensure that child care centers and day care homes 
meet the licensing/approval criteria set forth in this part. Sponsoring 
organizations shall submit to the State agency documentation that 
facilities under their jurisdiction are in compliance with licensing/
approval requirements. Independent centers shall submit such 
documentation to the State agency on their own behalf.
    (1) General. Each State agency shall establish procedures to 
annually review information submitted by institutions to ensure that all 
participating child care centers, day care homes, and outside-school-
hours care centers either:

[[Page 175]]

    (i) Are licensed or approved by Federal, State, or local 
authorities, provided that institutions which are approved for Federal 
programs on the basis of State or local licensing shall not be eligible 
for the Program if their licenses lapse or are terminated; or
    (ii) Are complying with applicable procedures to renew licensing or 
approval in situations where the State agency has no information that 
licensing or approval will be denied; or
    (iii) Receive Title XX funds for providing child care, if licensing 
or approval is not available; or
    (iv) Demonstrate compliance with applicable State or local child 
care standards to the State agency, if licensing is not available and 
title XX funds are not received; or
    (v) Demonstrate compliance with CACFP child care standards to the 
State agency, if licensing or approval is not available and Title XX 
funds are not received.
    (2) CACFP child care standards. (i) When licensing or approval is 
not available, independent child care centers, and sponsoring 
organizations on behalf of their child care centers or day care homes, 
may elect to demonstrate compliance, annually, with the following CACFP 
child care standards or other standards specified in paragraph (d)(3) of 
this section:
    (A) Staff/child ratios. (1) Day care homes provide care for no more 
than 12 children at any one time. One home caregiver is responsible for 
no more than 6 children ages 3 and above, or no more than 5 children 
ages 0 and above. No more than 2 children under the age of 3 are in the 
care of 1 caregiver. The home provider's own children who are in care 
and under the age of 14 are counted in the maximum ratios of caregivers 
to children.
    (2) Child care centers and outside-school-hours care centers do not 
fall below the following staff/child ratios:
    (i) For children under 6 weeks of age--1:1
    (ii) For children ages 6 weeks up to 3 years--1:4
    (iii) For children ages 3 years up to 6 years--1:6
    (iv) For children ages 6 years up to 10 years--1:15
    (v) For children ages 10 and above--1:20
    (B) Nondiscrimination. Day care services are available without 
discrimination on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age, 
or handicap.
    (C) Safety and sanitation. (1) A current health/sanitation permit or 
satisfactory report of an inspection conducted by local authorities 
within the past 12 months shall be submitted.
    (2) A current fire/building safety permit or satisfactory report of 
an inspection conducted by local authorities within the past 12 months 
shall be submitted.
    (3) Fire drills are held in accordance with local fire/building 
safety requirements.
    (D) Suitability of facilities. (1) Ventilation, temperature, and 
lighting are adequate for children's safety and comfort.
    (2) Floors and walls are cleaned and maintained in a condition safe 
for children.
    (3) Space and equipment, including rest arrangements for preschool 
age children, are adequate for the number of age range of participating 
children.
    (E) Social services. Independent centers, and sponsoring 
organizations in coordination with their facilities, have procedures for 
referring families of children in care to appropriate local health and 
social service agencies.
    (F) Health services. (1) Each child is observed daily for 
indications of difficulties in social adjustment, illness, neglect, and 
abuse, and appropriate action is initiated.
    (2) A procedure is established to ensure prompt notification of the 
parent or guardian in the event of a child's illness or injury, and to 
ensure prompt medical treatment in case of emergency.
    (3) Health records, including records of medical examinations and 
immunizations, are maintained for each enrolled child. (Not applicable 
to day care homes.)
    (4) At least one full-time staff member is currently qualified in 
first aid, including artificial respiration techniques. (Not applicable 
to day care homes.)
    (5) First aid supplies are available.

[[Page 176]]

    (6) Staff members undergo initial and periodic health assessments.
    (G) Staff training. The institution provides for orientation and 
ongoing training in child care for all caregivers.
    (H) Parental involvement. Parents are afforded the opportunity to 
observe their children in day care.
    (I) Self-evaluation. The institution has established a procedure for 
periodic self-evaluation on the basis of CACFP child care standards.
    (ii) When licensing or approval is not available, independent 
outside-school-hours care centers, and sponsoring organizations on 
behalf of their outside-school-hours care centers, may elect to 
demonstrate compliance with child care standards developed by the State 
agency which shall include, as a minimum, information on: (A) Fire/
safety, (B) sanitation, (C) organized activities, (D) kitchen and 
restroom facilities, (E) appropriateness of games and materials, (F) 
availability of emergency medical care, and (G) child-staff ratios as 
indicated in Sec. 226.6(d)(2)(i)(A). For items (A) and (B), of this 
paragraph, appropriate State or local permits are required.
    (3) Alternate approval procedures. Each State agency shall establish 
procedures to review information submitted by institutions for centers 
or homes for which licensing or approval is not available in order to 
establish eligibility for the Program. Licensing or approval is not 
available when (i) no Federal, State, or local licensing/approval 
standards have been established for child care centers, outside-school-
hours care centers, or day care homes; or (ii) no mechanism exists to 
determine compliance with licensing/approval standards. In these 
situations, independent centers, and sponsoring organizations on behalf 
of their facilities, may choose to demonstrate compliance with either 
CACFP child care standards, applicable State child care standards, or 
applicable local child care standards. State agencies shall provide 
information about applicable State child care standards and CACFP child 
care standards to institutions, but may require institutions electing to 
demonstrate compliance with applicable local child care standards to 
identify and submit these standards. The State agency may permit 
independent centers, and sponsoring organizations on behalf of their 
facilities, to submit self-certification forms, and may grant approval 
without first conducting a compliance review at the center or facility. 
But the State agency shall require submission of health/sanitation and 
fire/safety permits or certificates for all independent centers and 
facilities seeking alternate child care standards approval. Compliance 
with applicable child care standards are subject to review in accordance 
with Sec. 226.6(n).
    (e) Licensing/approval for adult day care centers. This paragraph 
prescribes State agency responsibilities to ensure that adult day care 
centers meet the licensing/approval criteria set forth in this part. 
Sponsoring organizations shall submit to the State agency documentation 
that facilities under their jurisdiction are in compliance with 
licensing/approval requirements. Independent adult day care centers 
shall submit such documentation to the State agency on their own behalf. 
Each State agency shall establish procedures to annually review 
information submitted by institutions to ensure that all participating 
adult day care centers either:
    (1) Are licensed or approved by Federal, State or local authorities, 
provided that institutions which are approved for Federal programs on 
the basis of State or local licensing shall not be eligible for the 
Program if their licenses lapse or are terminated; or
    (2) Are complying with applicable procedures to renew licensing or 
approval in situations where the State agency has no information that 
licensing or approval will be denied.
    (f) Annual requirements. State agencies shall require institutions 
to comply with applicable provisions of this part. Each State agency 
shall annually:
    (1) Enter into and execute a written Program agreement with each 
institution, or renew such agreement with the written concurrence of the 
institution. The Program agreement shall provide that the institution 
shall accept final financial and administrative responsibility for 
management of an effective

[[Page 177]]

food service, comply with all requirements under this part, and comply 
with all requirements of title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, title 
IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, Section 504 of the 
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, the Age Discrimination Act of 1975 and the 
Department's regulations concerning nondiscrimination (7 CFR parts 15, 
15a and 15b), including requirements for racial and ethnic participation 
data collection, public notification of the nondiscrimination policy, 
and reviews to assure compliance with such policy, to the end that no 
person shall, on the grounds of race, color, national origin, sex, age, 
or handicap be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits 
of, or be otherwise subjected to discrimination under the Program.
    (2) Require each sponsoring organization to submit a management plan 
with its application for review and approval. Such a plan shall include 
detailed information on the organizational administrative structure, the 
staff assigned to Program management and monitoring, administrative 
budget, and procedures which will be used by the sponsoring organization 
to administer the Program in and disburse payments to the child care 
facilities under its jurisdiction.
    (3) Require each institution to submit an administrative budget. 
Each sponsoring organization shall be required to incorporate this 
budget into its management plan.
    (4) Determine that all meal procurements with food service 
management companies are in conformance with the bid and contractual 
requirements of Sec. 226.22.
    (5) Inquire as to the preference of institutions for commodities or 
cash-in-lieu of commodities.
    (6) Provide institutions with information on foods available in 
plentiful supply, based on information provided by the Department.
    (7) Inform institutions with separate meal charges of their 
responsibility to ensure that free and reduced-price meals are served to 
participants unable to pay the full price and provide to all 
institutions a copy of the income standards to be used by institutions 
for determining the eligibility of participants for free and reduced-
price meals under the Program.
    (8) Perform verification of the eligibility of participants for free 
and reduced-price meals in participating institutions in accordance with 
the procedures outlined in Sec. 226.23(h). State agencies verifying the 
information on free and reduced-price applications shall ensure that 
verification activities are applied without regard to race, color, 
national origin, sex, age, or handicap.
    (g) Program expansion. Each State agency shall take action to expand 
the availability of benefits under this Program. At a minimum, the State 
shall annually notify each nonparticipating child care center, outside-
school-hours care center, and day care home within the State that is 
licensed, approved, registered, or receiving funds under title XX and 
each nonparticipating adult day care center that is licensed or 
approved, of the availability of the Program, the requirements for 
Program participation, and the application procedures to be followed in 
the Program. The State agency shall make the list of child care centers, 
adult day care centers, outside-school-hours care centers, and day care 
homes notified each year available to the public upon request.
    (h) Commodity distribution. The State shall annually inquire as to 
the preference of each institution for commodities or cash-in-lieu of 
commodities. Each institution electing cash-in-lieu of commodities shall 
receive such payments. Each institution which elects to receive 
commodities shall have commodities provided to it unless the State 
agency, after consultation with the State commodity distribution agency, 
demonstrates to FCS that distribution of commodities to the number of 
such institutions would be impracticable. The State agency may then, 
with the concurrence of FCS, provide cash-in-lieu of commodities for all 
institutions. A State agency request for cash-in-lieu of all commodities 
shall be submitted to FCS not later than May 1 of the school year 
preceding the school year for which the request is made. The State 
agency shall, by June 1 of each year, submit a list of

[[Page 178]]

institutions which have elected to receive commodities to the State 
commodity distribution agency, unless FCS has approved a request for 
cash-in-lieu of commodities for all institutions. The list shall be 
accompanied by information on the average daily number of lunches and 
suppers to be served to participants by each such institution.
    (i) Standard contract. Each State agency shall develop a standard 
contract in accordance with Sec. 226.21 and provide for its use between 
institutions and food service management companies. The contract shall 
expressly and without exception stipulate:
    (1) The institution shall provide the food service management 
company with a list of the State agency approved child care centers, day 
care homes, adult day care centers, and outside-school-hours care 
centers to be furnished meals by the food service management company, 
and the number of meals, by type, to be delivered to each location;
    (2) The food service management company shall maintain such records 
(supported by invoices, receipts or other evidence) as the institution 
will need to meet its responsibilities under this part, and shall 
promptly submit invoices and delivery reports to the institution no less 
frequently than monthly;
    (3) The food service management company shall have Federal, State or 
local health certification for the plant in which it proposes to prepare 
meals for use in the Program, and it shall ensure that health and 
sanitation requirements are met at all times. In addition, the State 
agency may require the food service management company to provide for 
meals which it prepares to be periodically inspected by the local health 
department or an independent agency to determine bacteria levels in the 
meals being prepared. These bacteria levels shall conform to the 
standards which are applied by the local health authority with respect 
to the level of bacteria which may be present in meals prepared or 
served by other establishments in the locality. Results of these 
inspections shall be submitted to the institution and to the State 
agency;
    (4) The meals served under the contract shall conform to the cycle 
menus upon which the bid was based, and to menu changes agreed upon by 
the institution and food service management company;
    (5) The books and records of the food service management company 
pertaining to the institution's food service operation shall be 
available for inspection and audit by representatives of the State 
agency, of the Department, and of the U.S. General Accounting Office at 
any reasonable time and place, for a period of 3 years from the date of 
receipt of final payment under the contract, or in cases where an audit 
requested by the State agency or the Department remains unresolved, 
until such time as the audit is resolved;
    (6) The food service management company shall operate in accordance 
with current Program regulations;
    (7) The food service management company shall not be paid for meals 
which are delivered outside of the agreed upon delivery time, are 
spoiled or unwholesome at the time of delivery, or do not otherwise meet 
the meal requirements contained in the contract;
    (8) Meals shall be delivered in accordance with a delivery schedule 
prescribed in the contract;
    (9) Increases and decreases in the number of meal orders may be made 
by the institution, as needed, within a prior notice period mutually 
agreed upon in the contract;
    (10) All meals served under the Program shall meet the requirements 
of Sec. 226.20;
    (11) All breakfasts, lunches, and suppers delivered for service in 
outside-school-hours care centers shall be unitized, with or without 
milk, unless the State agency determines that unitization would impair 
the effectiveness of food service operations. For meals delivered to 
child care centers and day care homes, the State agency may require 
unitization, with or without milk, of all breakfasts, lunches, and 
suppers only if the State agency has evidence which indicates that this 
requirement is necessary to ensure compliance with Sec. 226.20.
    (j) Procurement provisions. State agencies shall require 
institutions to adhere

[[Page 179]]

to the procurement provisions set forth in Sec. 226.22.
    (k) Institution appeal procedures. Except as provided in 
Sec. 226.8(g), each State agency shall establish an appeal procedure to 
be followed by an institution requesting a review of a denial of an 
institution's application for participation, a denial of an application 
submitted by a sponsoring organization on behalf of a facility, a 
termination of the participation of an institution or facility, a 
suspension of an institution's agreement, a denial of an institution's 
application for start-up payments, a denial of an advance payment, a 
denial of all or a part of the claim for reimbursement, (except for late 
submission under Sec. 226.10(e)), a denial by the State agency to 
forward to FCS an exception request by the institution or sponsoring 
organization for payment of a late claim or a request for an upward 
adjustment to a claim, demand for the remittance of an overpayment, and 
any other action of the State agency affecting the participation of an 
institution in the Program or the institution's claim for reimbursement. 
State agencies may use their own State appeal procedures provided the 
same procedures are applied to all appellants in the State and the 
procedures meet the following requirements: Appellants are assured of a 
fair and impartial hearing before an independent official at which they 
may be represented by legal counsel; decisions are rendered in a timely 
manner not to exceed 120 days from the date of the receipt of the 
request for review; appellants are afforded the right to either a review 
of the record with the right to file written information, or a hearing 
which they may attend in person; and adequate notice is given of the 
place, date and procedures of the hearing. The appeal procedures adopted 
by the State agency shall be made available in writing each year to all 
institutions at the time of application for participation in the Program 
and upon request. If the State has not established its own appeal 
procedures or the procedures do not meet the above listed criteria, the 
State agency shall observe the following procedures at a minimum:
    (1) The institution shall be advised in writing of the grounds on 
which the State agency based its action. The notice of action, which 
shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, shall also 
include a statement indicating that the institution has the right to 
appeal the action;
    (2) The written request for review shall be filed by the appellant 
not later than 15 calendar days from the date the appellant received the 
notice of action, and the State shall acknowledge the receipt of the 
request for appeal within 10 calendar days;
    (3) The appellant may refute the charges contained in the notice of 
action in person and by written documentation to the review official. In 
order to be considered, written documentation must be filed with the 
review official not later than 30 calendar days after the appellant 
received the notice of action. The appellant may retain legal counsel, 
or may be represented by another person. A hearing shall be held by the 
review official in addition to, or in lieu of, a review of written 
information submitted by the appellant only if the appellant so 
specifies in the letter of request for review. Failure of the appellant 
institution's representative to appear at a scheduled hearing shall 
constitute the appellant institution's waiver of the right to a personal 
appearance before the review official, unless the review official agrees 
to reschedule the hearing. A representative of the State agency shall be 
allowed to attend the hearing to respond to the appellant's testimony 
and to answer questions posed by the review official;
    (4) If the appellant has requested a hearing, the appellant and the 
State agency shall be provided with at least 10 calendar days advance 
written notice, sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the 
time and place of the hearing;
    (5) Any information on which the State agency's action was based 
shall be available to the appellant for inspection from the date of 
receipt of the request for review;
    (6) The review official shall be an independent and impartial 
official other than, and not accountable to, any person authorized to 
make decisions that are subject to appeal under the provisions of this 
section;

[[Page 180]]

    (7) The review offficial shall make a determination based on 
information provided by the State agency and the appellant, and on 
Program regulations;
    (8) Within 60 calendar days of the State agency's receipt of the 
request for review, the review official shall inform the State agency 
and the appellant of the determination of the review;
    (9) The State agency's action shall remain in effect during the 
appeal process. However, participating institutions and facilities may 
continue to operate under the Program during an appeal of termination, 
unless the action is based on imminent dangers to the health or welfare 
of participants. If the institution or facility has been terminated for 
this reason, the State agency shall so specify in its notice of action. 
Institutions electing to continue operating while appealing terminations 
shall not be reimbursed for any meals served during the period of the 
appeal if the State agency's action is upheld; and
    (10) The determination by the State review official is the final 
administrative determination to be afforded to the appellant.
    (11) Appeals shall not be allowed on decisions made by FCS on 
requests for exceptions to the claims submission deadlines stated in 
Sec. 226.10(e) or requests for upward adjustments to claims.
    (12) In cases where an appeal results in the dismissal of a claim 
against an institution which was asserted by the State agency based upon 
Federal audit findings, FCS may assert a claim against the State agency 
in accordance with the procedures outlined in Sec. 226.14(c).
    (l) Program assistance. Each State agency shall provide technical 
and supervisory assistance to institutions and facilities to facilitate 
effective Program operations, monitor progress toward achieving Program 
goals, and ensure compliance with the Department's nondiscrimination 
regulations (part 15 of this title) issued under title VI of the Civil 
Rights Act of 1964. Documentation of supervisory assistance activities, 
including reviews conducted, corrective actions prescribed, and follow-
up efforts, shall be maintained on file by the State agency. Program 
reviews shall assess institutional compliance with the provisions of 
this part and with any applicable instructions of FCS and the 
Department. State agencies shall annually review 33.3 percent of all 
institutions. State agencies shall also ensure that each institution is 
reviewed according to the following schedule.
    (1) Independent centers, sponsoring organizations of centers, and 
sponsoring organizations of day care homes with 1 to 200 homes shall be 
reviewed at least once every four years. Reviews of sponsoring 
organizations shall include reviews of 15 percent of their child care, 
adult day care and outside-school-hours care centers and 10 percent of 
their day care homes.
    (2) Sponsoring organizations with more than 200 homes shall be 
reviewed at least once every two years. Reviews of such sponsoring 
organizations shall include reviews of 5 percent of the first 1,000 
homes and 2.5 percent of all homes in excess of 1,000.
    (3) Reviews shall be conducted for newly participating sponsoring 
organizations with five or more child care facilities or adult day care 
facilities within the first 90 days of program operations.
    (m) Program irregularities. Each State agency shall promptly 
investigate complaints received or irregularities noted in connection 
with the operation of the Program, and shall take appropriate action to 
correct any irregularities. State agencies shall maintain on file 
evidence of such investigations and actions. FCS and OIG may make 
investigations at the request of the State agency, or whenever FCS or 
OIG determines that investigations are appropriate.
    (n) Child care standards compliance. The State agency shall, when 
conducting administrative reviews of child care centers, outside-school-
hours care centers, and day care homes approved by the State agency 
under paragraph (d)(3) of this section, determine compliance with the 
child care standards used to establish eligibility, and the institution 
shall ensure that all violations are corrected and the State shall 
ensure that the institution has corrected all

[[Page 181]]

violations. If violations are not corrected within 60 calendar days of 
written notification to the institution, the State agency shall 
terminate the Program participation of the violating institution or 
facility. However, if the health or safety of the children is imminently 
threatened, the State agency may immediately terminate participation of 
the institution or facility. If, during an administrative review of a 
child care center, outside-school-hours care center, or day care home 
not approved by the State agency under paragraph (d)(3) of this section, 
the State agency observes violations of applicable health, safety, or 
staff-child ratio standards, or attendance in excess of licensed 
capacity, the State agency shall promptly refer such violations to the 
appropriate authority. The State agency may deny reimbursement for meals 
served to attending children in excess of authorized capacity.
    (o) Sponsoring organization agreement. Each State agency shall 
develop and provide for the use of a standard form of agreement between 
each day care home sponsoring organization and all day care homes 
participating in the Program under such organization. However, the State 
agency may, at the request of the sponsor, approve an agreement 
developed by the sponsor. State agencies may develop a similar form for 
use between sponsoring organizations and other types of facilities.
    (p) Following its reviews of institutions and facilities under 
Secs. 226.6(l) and 226.23(h) conducted prior to July 1, 1988, the State 
agency shall report data on key elements of program operations on a form 
designated by FCS. These key elements include but are not limited to the 
program areas of meal requirements, determination of eligibility for 
free and reduced price meals, and the accuracy of reimbursement claims. 
These forms shall be submitted within 90 days of the completion of the 
data collection for the institutions except that, if the State has 
elected to conduct reviews of verification separate from its 
administrative reviews, the State shall retain data until all key 
elements have been reviewed and shall report all data for each 
institution on one form within 90 days of the completion of the data 
collection for all key elements for that institution. States shall 
ensure that all key element data for an institution is collected during 
a 12-month period.

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 226.6, 
see the List of CFR Sections Affected appearing in the Finding Aids 
section of this volume.


<R05>
Sec. 226.7  State agency responsibilities for financial management.

    (a) This section prescribes standards of financial management 
systems in administering Program funds by the State agency and 
institutions.
    (b) Each State agency shall maintain an acceptable financial 
management system, adhere to financial management standards and 
otherwise carry out financial management policies as delineated in the 
Uniform Federal Assistance Regulations, at 7 CFR part 3015. State 
agencies or FCSRO's, where applicable, shall also have a system in place 
for monitoring and reviewing the institutions' documentation of their 
nonprofit status to ensure that all Program reimbursement funds are 
used: (1) Solely for the conduct of the food service operation; or (2) 
to improve such food service operations, principally for the benefit of 
the participants.
    (c) Management evaluations and audits. State agencies shall provide 
FCS with full opportunity to conduct management evaluations (including 
visits to institutions and facilities) of all operations of the State 
agency under the Program and shall provide OIG with full opportunity to 
conduct audits (including visits to institutions and facilities) of all 
operations of the State agency under the Program. Within 60 calendar 
days of receipt of each management evaluation report, the State agency 
shall submit to FCSRO a written plan for correcting serious 
deficiencies, including specific timeframes for accomplishing corrective 
actions and initiating follow-up efforts. If a State agency makes a 
showing of good cause, however, FCS may allow more than 60 days in which 
to submit a plan. Each State agency shall make available its records, 
including records of the receipt and expenditure of funds, upon request 
by FCS or OIG. OIG shall also have the right to make audits of

[[Page 182]]

the records and operation of any institution.
    (d) Reports. Each State agency shall submit to FCS the final Report 
of the Child and Adult Care Food Program (FCS 44) for each month which 
shall be limited to claims submitted in accordance with Sec. 226.10(e) 
and which shall be postmarked and/or submitted no later than 90 days 
following the last day of the month covered by the report. States shall 
not receive Program funds for any month for which the final report is 
not submitted within this time limit unless FCS grants an exception. 
Upward adjustments to a State agency's report shall not be made after 90 
days from the month covered by the report unless authorized by FCS. 
Downward adjustments shall always be made, without FCS authorization, 
regardless of when it is determined that such adjustments are necessary. 
Adjustments shall be reported to FCS in accordance with procedures 
established by FCS. Each State agency shall also submit to FCS a 
quarterly Financial Status Report (SF-269) on the use of Program funds. 
Such reports shall be postmarked and/or submitted no later than 30 days 
after the end of each fiscal year quarter. Obligations shall be reported 
only for the fiscal year in which they occur. A final Financial Status 
Report for each fiscal year shall be postmarked and/or submitted to FCS 
within 120 days after the end of the fiscal year. FCS shall not be 
responsible for reimbursing unpaid Program obligations reported later 
than 120 days after the close of the fiscal year in which they were 
incurred.
    (e) Annual plan. Each State shall submit to the Secretary for 
approval by August 15 of each year an annual plan for the use of State 
administrative expense funds, including a staff formula for State 
personnel.
    (f) Rate assignment. Each State agency shall require institutions 
(other than sponsoring organizations for day care homes) to submit, not 
less frequently than annually, information necessary to assign rates of 
reimbursement as outlined in Sec. 226.9.
    (g) Administrative budget approval. The State agency shall approve 
institution administrative budgets, and shall limit allowable 
administrative costs claimed by each sponsoring organization for day 
care homes to administrative costs approved in its annual budget. The 
State agency may establish such administrative costs limits for other 
institutions. Administrative budget levels may be adjusted to reflect 
changes in Program activities.
    (h) Start-up payments. Each State agency shall establish procedures 
for evaluating requests for start-up payments, issuing these payments to 
eligible sponsoring organizations, and monitoring the use of these 
payments.
    (i) Advance payments. Each State agency shall establish procedures 
for issuing advance payments by the first day of each month and 
comparing these payments with earned reimbursement on a monthly basis. 
The State agency shall maintain on file a statement of the State's law 
and policy governing the use of interest earned on advanced funds by 
sponsors, institutions, child care facilities and adult day care 
facilities.
    (j) Recovery of overpayments. Each State agency shall establish 
procedures to recover outstanding start-up and advance payments from 
institutions which, in the opinion of the State agency, will not be able 
to earn these payments.
    (k) Claims processing. Each State agency shall establish procedures 
for institutions to properly submit claims for reimbursement. All valid 
claims shall be paid within 45 calendar days of receipt. Within 15 
calendar days of receipt of any incomplete or incorrect claim which must 
be revised for payment, the State agency shall notify the institution as 
to why and how such claim must be revised. If the State agency disallows 
partial or full payment for a claim for reimbursement, it shall notify 
the institution which submitted the claim of its right to appeal under 
Sec. 226.6(k). State agencies may permit disallowances to be appealed 
separately from claims for reimbursement.
    (l) Participation controls. The State agency may establish control 
procedures to ensure that payment is not made for meals served to 
participants attending in excess of the authorized capacity of each 
independent center,

[[Page 183]]

adult day care facility or child care facility.
    (m) Financial management system. Each State agency shall establish a 
financial management system in accordance with the Uniform Federal 
Assistance Regulations, 7 CFR part 3015, and FCS guidance to identify 
allowable Program costs and establish standards for institutional 
recordkeeping and reporting. These standards shall (1) prohibit claiming 
reimbursement for meals provided by a participant's family, except as 
authorized by Sec. 226.18(e) and (2) allow the cost of meals served to 
adults who perform necessary food service labor under the Program, 
except in day care homes. The State agency shall provide guidance on 
financial management requirements to each institution.

[47 FR 36527, Aug. 20, 1982, as amended at 48 FR 21530, May 13, 1983; 
Amdt. 5, 49 FR 18988, May 4, 1984; 50 FR 8580, Mar. 4, 1985; 50 FR 
26975, July 1, 1985; 53 FR 52589, Dec. 28, 1988; Amdt. 22, 55 FR 1378, 
Jan. 14, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 226.8  Audits.

    (a) Unless otherwise exempt, audits at the State and institution 
levels shall be conducted in accordance with the Office of Management 
and Budget's Circulars A-128 and A-110 and the Department's Uniform 
Federal Assistance Regulations (7 CFR part 3015). Title XIX and title XX 
proprietary institutions not subject to organization-wide audits shall 
be audited by the State agency at least once every two years.
    (b) The funds provided to the State agency under Sec. 226.4(h) may 
be made available to institutions to fund a portion of organization-wide 
audits, provided that the organization-wide audit includes tests of the 
CACFP in accordance with section 10.558 of the Compliance Supplement to 
OMB Circular A-128. The funds provided to an institution for an 
organization-wide audit shall not exceed the portion of the audit's cost 
equal to the CACFP's portion of the total Federal grant.
    (c) Funds provided under Sec. 226.4(h) may be used by the State 
agency to conduct program-specific audits of institutions not subject to 
organization-wide audits, or for which the State agency considers 
program specific audits to be needed. The State agency may use any funds 
remaining after all required program-specific audits have been performed 
to conduct administrative reviews of institutions.
    (d) Funds provided under Sec. 226.4(h) may only be obligated during 
the fiscal year for which those funds are allocated. If funds provided 
under Sec. 226.4(h) are not sufficient to meet the requirements of this 
section, the State agency may then use available State administrative 
expense funds to conduct audits, provided that the State agency is 
arranging for the audits and has not passed the responsibility down to 
the institution.
    (e) In conducting management evaluations or audits for any fiscal 
year, FCS or OIG may disregard any overpayment which does not exceed 
$100. In conducting State agency sponsored audits in State administered 
programs, the State agency may disregard any overpayment which does not 
exceed the amount established by State law, regulations or procedures as 
a minimum for which claims will be made for State losses generally. No 
overpayment shall be disregarded, however, where there are unpaid claims 
of the same fiscal year from which the overpayment can be deducted, or 
where there is evidence of violation of criminal law or civil fraud 
statutes.
    (f) While OIG shall rely to the fullest extent feasible upon State 
sponsored audits, OIG may, whenever it considers necessary:
    (1) Make audits on a statewide basis;
    (2) Perform on-site test audits;
    (3) Review audit reports and related working papers of audits 
performed by or for State agencies.
    (g) State agencies are not required to provide a hearing to an 
institution for State actions taken on the basis of a Federal audit 
determination. If a State agency does not provide a hearing in such 
situations, FCS will provide a hearing, upon request, in accordance with 
procedures set forth in Sec. 226.6(j) of this part.

[47 FR 36527, Aug. 20, 1982, as amended at 50 FR 8580, Mar. 4, 1985; 51 
FR 4295, Feb. 4, 1986; 52 FR 5526, Feb. 25, 1987; 53 FR 52590, Dec. 28, 
1988; Amdt. 22, 55 FR 1378, Jan. 14, 1990]

[[Page 184]]


<R04>
                      Subpart D--Payment Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 226.9  Assignment of rates of reimbursement for centers.

    (a) The State agency shall assign rates of reimbursement, not less 
frequently than annually, on the basis of family-size and income 
information reported by each institution. Assigned rates of 
reimbursement may be changed more frequently than annually if warranted 
by changes in family-size and income information. Assigned rates of 
reimbursement shall be adjusted annually to reflect changes in the 
national average payment rates.
    (b) The State agency shall either:
    (1) Require that institutions submit each month's figures for meals 
served daily to participants from families meeting the eligibility 
standards for free meals, to participants from families meeting the 
eligibility standards for reduced-price meals, and to participants from 
families not meeting such guidelines; or
    (2) Establish claiming percentages, not less frequently that 
annually, for each institution on the basis of the number of enrolled 
participants eligible for free, reduced-price, and paid meals; or
    (3) Determine a blended per-meal rate of reimbursement, not less 
frequently than annually, by adding the products obtained by multiplying 
the applicable national average payment rate of reimbursement for each 
category (free, reduced-price, paid) by the claiming percentage for that 
category.
    (c) States have two methods of reimbursing institutions. The method 
chosen by the State agency must be applied to all institutions 
participating in the Program in that State. These methods are:
    (1) Meals times rates payment, which involves reimbursing an 
institution for meals served at the assigned rate for each meal. This 
method entails no comparison to the costs incurred by the institution 
for the meal service; and,
    (2) Meals times rates or actual costs, whichever is the lesser, 
which involves reimbursing an institution for meals served at the 
assigned rate for each meal or at the level of the costs actually 
incurred by the institution for the meal service. This method does 
entail a comparison of the costs incurred to the meal rates, with the 
costs being a limiting factor on the level of reimbursement an 
institution may receive.
    (d) In those States where the State agency has chosen the option to 
implement a meals times rates payment system State-wide, the State 
agency may elect to pay an institution's final claim for reimbursement 
for the fiscal year at higher reassigned rates of reimbursement for 
lunches and suppers; however, the reassigned rates may not exceed the 
applicable maximum rates of reimbursement established under 
Sec. 210.11(b) of the National School Lunch Program regulations. In 
those States which use the method of comparing meals times rates or 
actual costs, whichever is lesser, the total payments made to an 
institution shall not exceed the total net costs incurred for the fiscal 
year.

[47 FR 36527, Aug. 20, 1982, as amended at 48 FR 21530, May 13, 1983; 53 
FR 52590, Dec. 28, 1988; Amdt. 22, 55 FR 1378, Jan. 14, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 226.10  Program payment procedures.

    (a) By the first day of each month of operation, the State agency 
shall provide an advance payment to each institution electing to receive 
such payments, in accordance with Sec. 226.6(b)(10). Advance payments 
shall equal the full level of claims estimated by the State agency to be 
submitted in accordance with paragraph (c) of this section, considering 
prior reimbursement claims and other information such as fluctuations in 
enrollment. The institution may decline to receive all or any part of 
the advance.
    (b) For each fiscal year, the amount of payment made, including 
funds advanced to an institution, shall not exceed the amount of valid 
reimbursement claimed by that institution. To ensure that institutions 
do not receive excessive advance payments, the State agency shall 
observe the following procedures:
    (1) After three advance payments have been made to an institution, 
the State agency shall ensure that no subsequent advance is made until 
the State agency has validated the institution's claim for reimbursement 
for the

[[Page 185]]

third month prior to the month for which the next advance is to be paid.
    (2) If the State agency has audit or monitoring evidence of 
extensive program deficiencies or other reasons to believe that an 
institution will not be able to submit a valid claim for reimbursement, 
advance payments shall be withheld until the claim is received or the 
deficiencies are corrected.
    (3) Each month the State agency shall compare incoming claims 
against advances to ensure that the level of funds authorized under 
paragraph (a) of this section does not exceed the claims for 
reimbursement received from the institution. Whenever this process 
indicates that excessive advances have been authorized, the State agency 
shall either demand full repayment or adjust subsequent payments, 
including advances.
    (4) If, as a result of year end reconciliation as required by the 
Department's Uniform Federal Assistance Regulations (7 CFR part 3015), 
the State agency determines that reimbursement earned by an institution 
during a fiscal year is less than the amount paid, including funds 
advanced to that institution, the State agency shall demand repayment of 
the outstanding balance or adjust subsequent payments.
    (c) Claims for Reimbursement shall report information in accordance 
with the financial management system established by the State agency, 
and in sufficient detail to justify the reimbursement claimed and to 
enable the State agency to provide the final Report of the Child and 
Adult Care Food Program (FCS 44) required under Sec. 226.7(d). In 
submitting a Claim for Reimbursement, each institution shall certify 
that the claim is correct and that records are available to support that 
claim. Independent proprietary title XIX or title XX centers, for months 
in which not less than 25 percent of enrolled participants were title 
XIX or title XX beneficiaries, shall submit the percentages of enrolled 
participants receiving title XIX or title XX benefits for the month 
covered by the claim month. Sponsoring organizations of such centers 
shall submit the percentage of enrolled participants receiving title XIX 
or title XX benefits for each center for the claim. Sponsoring 
organizations of such centers shall not include in any claim those 
centers in which less than 25 percent of enrolled participants were 
title XIX or title XX beneficiaries for the month claimed.
    (d) All records to support the claim shall be retained for a period 
of three years after the date of submission of the final claim for the 
fiscal year to which they pertain, except that if audit findings have 
not been resolved, the records shall be retained beyond the end of the 
three year period as long as may be required for the resolution of the 
issues raised by the audit. All accounts and records pertaining to the 
Program shall be made available, upon request, to representatives of the 
State agency, of the Department, and of the U.S. General Accounting 
Office for audit or review, at a reasonable time and place.
    (e) Unless otherwise approved by FCS, the Claim for Reimbursement 
for any month shall cover only Program operations for that month except 
if the first or last month of Program operations in any fiscal year 
contains 10 operating days or less, such month may be added to the Claim 
for Reimbursement for the appropriate adjacent month; however, Claims 
for Reimbursement may not combine operations occurring in two fiscal 
years. A final Claim for Reimbursement shall be postmarked and/or 
submitted to the State agency not later than 60 days following the last 
day of the full month covered by the claim. State agencies may establish 
shorter deadlines at their discretion. Claims not postmarked and/or 
submitted within 60 days shall not be paid with Program funds unless FCS 
determines that an exception should be granted. The State agency shall 
promptly take corrective action with respect to any Claim for 
Reimbursement as determined necessary through its claim review process 
or otherwise. In taking such corrective action, State agencies may make 
upward adjustments in Program funds claimed on claims filed within the 
60 day deadline if such adjustments are completed within 90 days of the 
last day of the claim month and are reflected in the final Report of the 
Child

[[Page 186]]

and Adult Care Food Programs (FCS-44) for the claim month which is 
required under 226.7(d). Upward adjustments in Program funds claimed 
which are not reflected in the final FCS-44 for the claim month shall 
not be made unless authorized by FCS. Downward adjustments in Program 
funds claimed shall always be made without FCS authorization regardless 
of when it is determined that such adjustments are necessary.
    (f) If a State agency has reason to believe that an institution or 
food service management company has engaged in unlawful acts with 
respect to Program Operations, evidence found in audits, investigations 
or other reviews shall be a basis for non-payment of claims for 
reimbursement.

[47 FR 36527, Aug. 20, 1982, as amended by Amdt. 5, 49 FR 18988, May 4, 
1984; 50 FR 26975, July 1, 1985; 53 FR 52590, Dec. 28, 1988; Amdt. 22, 
55 FR 1378, Jan. 14, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 226.11  Program payments for child care centers, adult day care centers and outside-school-hours care centers.

    (a) Payments shall be made only to institutions operating under an 
agreement with the State agency for the meal types specified in the 
agreement served at approved child care centers, adult day care centers 
and outside-school-hours care centers. A State agency may make payment 
for meals served in accordance with provisions of the Program in the 
calendar month preceding the calendar month in which the agreement is 
executed.
    (b) Each institution shall report each month to the State agency the 
total number of meals, by type (breakfasts, lunches, suppers, and 
supplements), served to participants except that such reports shall be 
made for a proprietary title XIX or title XX center only for calendar 
months during which not less than 25 percent of enrolled participants 
were title XIX or title XX beneficiaries.
    (c) Each State agency shall base reimbursement to each institution 
on the number of meals, by type, served to participants multiplied by 
the assigned rates of reimbursement, except that reimbursement shall be 
payable to proprietary title XIX and title XX centers only for calendar 
months during which not less than 25 percent of enrolled participants 
were title XIX or title XX beneficiaries. In computing reimbursement, 
the State agency shall either:
    (1) Base reimbursement to institutions on actual daily counts of 
meals served, and multiply the number of meals, by type, served to 
participants eligible to receive free meals, served to participants 
eligible to receive reduced-price meals, and served to participants from 
families not meeting such standards by the applicable national average 
payment rate; or
    (2) Apply the applicable claiming percentage or percentages to the 
total number of meals, by type, served to participants and multiply the 
product or products by the assigned rate of reimbursement for each meal 
type; or
    (3) Multiply the assigned blended per meal rate of reimbursement by 
the total number of meals, by type, served to participants.
    (d) If the State agency elects to reimburse its institutions 
according to the lesser of rates or actual costs, total Program payments 
to an institution during any fiscal year, including any cash payments in 
lieu of commodities, shall not exceed allowable Program operating and 
administrative costs, less income to the Program. The State agency may 
limit payments for administrative costs to the amount approved in the 
annual administrative budget of the institution. The State agency may 
prohibit an institution from using payments for operating costs to pay 
for administrative expenses.
    (e) Each institution shall maintain records as prescribed by the 
State agency's financial management system.

[47 FR 36527, Aug. 20, 1982, as amended at 48 FR 21530, May 13, 1983; 52 
FR 36907, Oct. 2, 1987; 53 FR 52590, Dec. 28, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 226.12  Administrative payments to sponsoring organizations for day care homes.

    (a) Sponsoring organizations for day care homes shall receive 
payments for administrative costs. During any fiscal year, 
administrative costs payments to a sponsoring organization may not 
exceed the lesser of (1) actual expenditures for the costs of 
administering the

[[Page 187]]

Program less income to the Program, or (2) the amount of administrative 
costs approved by the State agency in the sponsoring organization's 
budget, or (3) the sum of the products obtained by multiplying each 
month the sponsoring organization's:
    (i) Initial 50 day care homes by 42 dollars;
    (ii) Next 150 day care homes by 32 dollars;
    (iii) Next 800 day care homes by 25 dollars; and
    (iv) Additional day care homes by 22 dollars.

During any fiscal year, administrative payments to a sponsoring 
organization may not exceed 30 percent of the total amount of 
administrative payments and food service payments for day care home 
operations.

    (b) Prospective sponsoring organizations of day care homes, 
participating sponsoring organizations of child care centers or outside-
school-hours care centers, independent centers, and participating 
sponsoring organizations of fewer than 50 homes which meet the criteria 
of this paragraph shall be entitled to receive start-up payments to 
develop or expand successful Program operations in day care homes. The 
State agency shall approve start-up payments only once for any eligible 
sponsoring organization. Sponsoring organizations which apply for start-
up payments shall evidence:
    (1) Public or nonprofit status in accordance with Sec. 226.15(a), 
except that sponsoring organizations which are moving toward compliance 
with the requirements for IRS tax-exempt status must demonstrate current 
tax-exempt status under the State law and regulations; (2) an 
organizational history of managing funds and ongoing activities (i.e. 
administering public or private programs); (3) an acceptable and 
realistic plan for recruiting day care homes to participate in the 
Program, which may be based on estimates of the number of day care homes 
to be recruited and information supporting their existence (e.g., the 
method of contacting providers); and (4) acceptable preliminary 
sponsoring organization management plan (e.g., plans for preoperational 
visits, training).

The State agency shall deny start-up payments to applicant sponsoring 
organizations which fail to meet any of these criteria or which have 
demonstrated financial irresponsibility in the operation of other 
programs funded by Federal, State, or local governments. The State 
agency shall notify the sponsoring organization of the reasons for 
denial and allow the sponsoring organization full opportunity to submit 
evidence on appeal as provided for in Sec. 226.6(k). Any sponsoring 
organization applying for start-up funds shall be notified of approval 
or disapproval by the State agency in writing within 30 calendar days of 
filing a complete and correct application. If a sponsoring organization 
submits an incomplete application, the State agency shall notify the 
sponsoring organization within 15 calendar days of receipt of the 
application and shall provide technical assistance, if necessary, to the 
sponsoring organization for the purpose of completing its application.

    (c) Applicant sponsoring organizations which apply for and meet the 
criteria for start-up payments shall enter into an agreement with the 
State agency. The agreement shall specify:
    (1) Activities which the sponsoring organization will undertake to 
initiate or expand Program operations in day care homes;
    (2) The amount of start-up payments to be issued to the sponsoring 
organization, together with a budget detailing the costs which the 
sponsoring organization shall incur, document, and claim;
    (3) The time allotted to the sponsoring organization for the 
initiation or expansion of Program operations in family day care homes;
    (4) The responsibility of the applicant sponsoring organization to 
repay, upon demand by the State agency, start-up payments not expended 
in accordance with the agreement.
    (d) Upon execution of the agreement, the State agency shall issue a 
start-up payment to the sponsoring organization in an amount equal to 
not less than one, but not more than two, month's anticipated 
administrative reimbursement to the sponsoring organization as 
determined by the State

[[Page 188]]

agency. However, no sponsoring organization may receive start-up 
payments for more than 50 day care homes, and eligible sponsoring 
organizations with fewer than 50 homes under their jurisdiction at the 
time of application for start-up funds shall receive such payments for 
up to 50 homes, less the number of homes under their jurisdiction. In 
determining the amount of start-up payments to be made to a sponsoring 
organization, the State agency shall consider the anticipated level of 
start-up costs to be incurred by the sponsoring organization and 
alternate sources of funds available to the sponsoring organization.
    (e) Upon expiration of the time allotted to the sponsoring 
organization for initiating or expanding Program operations in day care 
homes, the State agency shall obtain and review documentation of 
activities performed and costs incurred by the sponsoring organization 
under the terms of the start-up agreement. If the sponsoring 
organization has not made every reasonable effort to carry out the 
activities specified in the agreement, the State agency shall demand 
repayment of all or part of the payment; however, the sponsoring 
organization may retain start-up payment for all day care homes which 
initiate Program operations. No sponsoring organization may retain any 
start-up payments in excess of its actual costs for the expenditures 
specified in the agreement.

[47 FR 36527, Aug. 20, 1982; 47 FR 46072, Oct. 15, 1982, as amended at 
53 FR 52590, Dec. 28, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 226.13  Food service payments to sponsoring organizations for day care homes.

    (a) Payments shall be made only to sponsoring organizations 
operating under an agreement with the State agency for the meal types 
specified in the agreement served to enrolled nonresident children and 
eligible enrolled children of day care home providers, at approved day 
care homes.
    (b) Each sponsoring organization shall report each month to the 
State agency the total number of meals, by type (breakfasts, lunches, 
suppers, and supplements), served to children enrolled in approved day 
care homes.
    (c) Each sponsoring organization shall receive payment for meals 
served to children enrolled in approved day care homes at the rate of 
47.75 cents for each breakfast, 93.5 cents for each lunch and supper, 
and 28 cents for each supplement. However, the rate for the lunches and 
suppers shall be reduced by the value of commodities established under 
Sec. 226.5(b) for all sponsoring organizations for day care homes which 
have elected to receive commodities. The full amount of food service 
payments shall be disbursed to each day care home on the basis of the 
number of meals, by type, served to children. However, the sponsoring 
organization may withhold from Program payments to each home an amount 
equal to costs incurred for the provision of Program foodstuffs or meals 
by the sponsoring organization in behalf of the home and with the home 
provider's written consent.


<R05>
Sec. 226.14  Claims against institutions.

    (a) State agencies shall disallow any portion of a claim for 
reimbursement and recover any payment to an institution not properly 
payable under this part. However, the State agency shall notify the 
institution of the reasons for any disallowance or demand for repayment, 
and allow the institution full opportunity to submit evidence on appeal 
as provided for in Sec. 226.6(k). Miminum State agency collection 
procedures for unearned payments shall include:
    (1) Written demand to the institution for the return of improper 
payments; (2) if, after 30 calendar days, the institution fails to remit 
full payment or agree to a satisfactory repayment schedule, a second 
written demand for the return of improper payments sent by certified 
mail return receipt requested; and (3) if, after 60 calendar days, the 
institution fails to remit full payment or agree to a satisfactory 
repayment schedule, the State agency shall refer the claim against the 
institution to appropriate State or Federal authorities for pursuit of 
legal remedies.
    (b) In the event that the State agency finds that an institution 
which prepares its own meals is failing to meet the meal requirements of 
Sec. 226.20, the

[[Page 189]]

State agency need not disallow payment or collect an overpayment arising 
out of such failure if the institution takes such other action as, in 
the opinion of the State agency, will have a corrective effect. However, 
the State agency shall not disregard any overpayments or waive 
collection action arising from the findings of Federal audits.
    (c) If FCS does not concur with the State agency's action in paying 
an institution or in failing to collect an overpayment, FCS shall notify 
the State agency of its intention to assert a claim against the State 
agency. In all such cases, the State agency shall have full opportunity 
to submit evidence concerning the action taken. The State agency shall 
be liable to FCS for failure to collect an overpayment, unless FCS 
determines that the State agency has conformed with this part in issuing 
the payment and has exerted reasonable efforts to recover the improper 
payment.

[47 FR 36527, Aug. 20, 1982; 47 FR 46072, Oct. 15, 1982, as amended at 
50 FR 8580, Mar. 4, 1985; 53 FR 52590, Dec. 28, 1988]


<R04>
                    Subpart E--Operational Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 226.15  Institution provisions.

    (a) Tax-exempt status. Except for proprietary title XIX and title XX 
centers, and sponsoring organizations of such centers, institutions 
shall be public, or have tax-exempt status under the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1954, or be moving toward compliance with the requirements for 
tax-exempt status, or be currently operating another Federal program 
requiring nonprofit status. An institution which has applied to IRS for 
tax-exempt status may participate in the program while its application 
is pending review by IRS. It shall, however, be the responsibility of 
the institution to document that it has complied with all requirements 
of IRS and has provided all information requested. If IRS denies the 
application for tax-exempt status, the institution shall immediately 
notify the State agency of such denial. The State agency shall then 
terminate the participation of the institution. If IRS certification of 
tax-exempt status has not been received within 12 months of filing the 
application with IRS, and IRS indicates that the institution has failed 
to provide all required information, the State agency shall terminate 
the participation of the institution until such time as IRS tax-exempt 
status is obtained.
    (b) Applications. Each institution shall submit to the State agency 
all information required for its approval. As a minimum, such 
information shall include:
    (1) Except for proprietary title XIX and title XX centers and 
sponsoring organizations or proprietary title XIX and title XX centers, 
evidence of nonprofit status, in accordance with Sec. 226.15(a).
    (2) An application for participation, or application renewal 
materials, accompanied by all necessary supporting documentation;
    (3) An administrative budget;
    (4) If an independent child care center or independent outside-
school-hours care center, documentation that it meets the licensing/
approval requirements of Sec. 226.6(d)(1); or, if an independent adult 
day care center, the licensing/approval requirements of 
Sec. 226.19a(b)(3).
    (5) A nondiscrimination and free and reduced-price policy statement, 
and information regarding a public release, in accordance with 
Sec. 226.23; and
    (6) For each proprietary title XIX or title XX center, documentation 
that it provides nonresidential day care services for which it receives 
compensation under title XIX or title XX of the Social Security Act and 
certification that not less than 25 percent of the participants enrolled 
during the most recent calendar month were title XIX or title XX 
beneficiaries. Sponsoring organizations shall provide documentation and 
certification for each proprietary title XIX or title XX center under 
its jurisdiction.
    (c) Responsibility. Each institution shall accept final 
administrative and financial responsibility for Program operations. No 
institution may contract out for management of the Program.
    (d) Staffing. Each institution shall provide adequate supervisory 
and operational personnel for management and monitoring of the Program.

[[Page 190]]

    (e) Recordkeeping. Each institution shall establish procedures to 
collect and maintain all necessary Program records. Such records shall 
include:
    (1) Copies of all applications and supporting documents submitted to 
the State agency;
    (2) Documentation of the enrollment of each participant at child 
care centers, adult day care centers and outside-school-hours care 
centers including information used to determine eligibility for free or 
reduced price meals in accordance with Sec. 226.23(e)(1).
    (3) Documentation of the enrollment of each child at day care homes 
and information used to determine the eligibility of enrolled providers' 
children for free or reduced price meals in accordance with 
Sec. 226.23(e)(1).
    (4) Daily records indicating the number of participants in 
attendance and the number of meals, by type (breakfast, lunch, supper, 
and supplements), served to participants.
    (5) For child care centers and outside-school-hours care centers 
claiming reimbursement for two meals and two supplements or three meals 
and one supplement per child per day, either:
    (i) Documentation of total time-in-attendance for each child at the 
center for each day for which the fourth meal service was claimed, 
including a time-in/time-out form which records time-in-attendance for 
each child at the center; or, at the discretion of the State agency,
    (ii) Documentation which demonstrates that at least eight hours 
elapse between the end of the first meal service and the beginning of 
the fourth meal service on any day in which reimbursement is claimed for 
a fourth meal; service.
    (6) Except at day care homes, daily records indicating the number of 
meals, by type, served to adults performing labor necessary to the food 
service;
    (7) Copies of invoices, receipts, or other records required by the 
State agency financial management instruction to document:
    (i) Administrative costs claimed by the institution;
    (ii) Operating costs claimed by the institution except sponsoring 
organizations of day care homes; and
    (iii) Income to the Program.
    (8) Copies of all claims for reimbursement submitted to the State 
agency;
    (9) Receipts for all Program payments received from the State 
agency;
    (10) Copies of menus, and any other food service records required by 
the State agency; and
    (11) Information on training session date(s) and location(s), as 
well as topics presented and names of participants;
    (12) Maintain documentation of nonprofit food service to ensure that 
all Program reimbursement funds are used: (i) Solely for the conduct of 
the food service operation; or (ii) to improve such food service 
operations, principally for the benefit of the enrolled participants.
    (f) Claims submission. Each institution shall submit claims for 
reimbursement to the State agency in accordance with Sec. 226.10.
    (g) Program agreement. Each institution shall enter into a Program 
agreement with the State agency in accordance with Sec. 226.6(f)(1).
    (h) Commodities. Each institution receiving commodities shall ensure 
proper commodity utilization.
    (i) Special Milk Program. No institution may participate in both the 
Child and Adult Care Food Program and the Special Milk Program at the 
same time.
    (j) Elderly feeding programs. Institutions which are school food 
authorities (as defined in part 210 of this chapter) may use facilities, 
equipment and personnel supported by funds provided under this part to 
support a nonprofit nutrition program for the elderly, including a 
program funded under the Older Americans Act of 1965 (42 U.S.C. 3001 et 
seq.).

[47 FR 36527, Aug. 20, 1982, as amended at 48 FR 21530, May 13, 1983; 50 
FR 8580, Mar. 4, 1985; 52 FR 15298, Apr. 28, 1987; 52 FR 36907, Oct. 2, 
1987; 53 FR 52590, Dec. 28, 1988; 54 FR 26724, June 26, 1989; Amdt. 22, 
55 FR 1378, Jan. 14, 1990; 56 FR 58174, Nov. 16, 1991; 61 FR 25554, May 
22, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 226.16  Sponsoring organization provisions.

    (a) Each sponsoring organization shall comply with all provisions of 
Sec. 226.15.

[[Page 191]]

    (b) Each sponsoring organization shall submit to the State agency 
all information required for its approval and the approval of all child 
care and adult day care facilities under its jurisdiction, including:
    (1) A sponsoring organization management plan, in accordance with 
Sec. 226.6(f)(2);
    (2) An application for participation, or renewal materials, for each 
child care and adult day care facility accompanied by all necessary 
supporting documentation; and
    (3) Timely information concerning the eligibility status of child 
care and adult day care facilities (such as licensing/approval actions).
    (c) Each sponsoring organization shall accept final administrative 
and financial responsibility for food service operations in all child 
care and adult day care facilities under its jurisdiction.
    (d) Each sponsoring organization shall provide adequate supervisory 
and operational personnel for the effective management and monitoring of 
the program at all child care and adult day care facilities under its 
jursidiction. At a minimum, such Program assistance shall include:
    (1) Pre-approval visits to each child care and adult day care 
facility for which application is made to discuss Program benefits and 
verify that the proposed food service does not exceed the capability of 
the child care facility;
    (2) Staff training for all child care and adult day care facilities 
in Program duties and responsibilities prior to beginning Program 
operations;
    (3) Additional training sessions, to be provided not less frequently 
than annually; and
    (4) Reviews of food service operations to assess compliance with 
meal pattern, recordkeeping, and other Program requirements. Such 
reviews shall be made not less frequently than:
    (i) Three times each year at each child care center and adult day 
care center, provided at least one review is made during each child care 
or adult day care center's first six weeks of Program operations and not 
more than six months elapse between reviews;
    (ii) Three times each year at each day care home, provided at least 
one review is made during each day care home's first four weeks of 
Program operations and not more than six months elapse between reviews. 
However, based on case-by-case findings by the State agency that 
improved efficiency and more effective management will result and 
subject to FCSRO approval, State agencies may allow some or all of their 
sponsors to conduct reviews an average of three times each year per day 
care home, provided that each day care home is reviewed at least twice 
each year, at least one review is made during each day care home's first 
four weeks of Program operations, and no more than six months elapse 
between reviews; and
    (iii) Six times each year for each outside-school-hours care center, 
provided at least one review is made during each outside-school-hours 
care center's first four weeks of Program operations and not more than 
three months elapse between reviews.
    (e) In addition to records required under Sec. 226.15(e), each 
sponsoring organization shall maintain the following:
    (1) Information concerning the dates and amounts of disbursements to 
each child care or adult day care facility;
    (2) Information concerning the location and dates of each child care 
or adult day care facility review, any problems noted, and the 
corrective action prescribed and effected.
    (f) The State agency may require a sponsoring organization to enter 
into separate agreements for the administration of separate types of 
facilities (child care centers, day care homes, adult day care centers, 
and outside-school-hours care centers).
    (g) Each sponsoring organization electing to receive advance 
payments of program funds for day care homes shall disburse the full 
amount of such payments within five working days of receipt from the 
State agency. If the sponsor requests the full operating advance to 
which it is entitled, the advances to day care homes shall be the full 
amount which the sponsor expects the home to earn based on the number of 
meals projected to be served to enrolled children during the period 
covered by the advance multiplied by the applicable payment rate as 
specified in Sec. 226.13(c). If a sponsor elects to receive

[[Page 192]]

only a part of the operating advance to which it is entitled, or if the 
full operating advance is insufficient to provide a full advance to each 
home, the advance shall be disbursed to its homes in a manner and an 
amount the sponsor deems appropriate. Each sponsor shall disburse any 
reimbursement payments for food service due to each day care home within 
five working days of receipt from the State agency. Such payment shall 
be based on the number of meals served to enrolled children at each day 
care home, less any payments advanced to such home. However, the 
sponsoring organization may withhold from Program payments to each home 
an amount equal to food service operating costs incurred by the 
sponsoring organization in behalf of the home and with the home 
provider's written consent. If payments from the State agency are not 
sufficient to provide all day care homes under the sponsoring 
organization's jurisdiction with advance payments and reimbursement 
payments, available monies shall be used to provide all due 
reimbursement payments before advances are disbursed.
    (h) Sponsoring organizations shall make payments of program funds to 
child care centers, adult day care centers or outside-school-hours care 
centers within five working days of receipt from the State agency, on 
the basis of the management plan approved by the State agency, and may 
not exceed the Program costs documented at each facility during any 
fiscal year; except in those States where the State agency has chosen 
the option to implement a meals times rates payment system. In those 
States which implement this optional method of reimbursement, such 
disbursements may not exceed the rates times the number of meals 
documented at each facility during any fiscal year.
    (i) Disbursements of advance payments may be withheld from child and 
adult day care facilities which fail to submit reports required by 
Sec. 226.15(e).
    (j) A for-profit organization shall be eligible to serve as a 
sponsoring organization for proprietary title XIX or title XX centers 
which have the same legal identity as the organization, but shall not be 
eligible to sponsor proprietary title XIX or title XX centers which are 
legally distinct from the organization, day care homes, or public or 
private nonprofit centers.

[47 FR 36527, Aug. 20, 1982; 47 FR 46072, Oct. 15, 1982, as amended at 
48 FR 21530, May 13, 1983; 50 FR 8580, Mar. 4, 1985; 50 FR 26975, July 
1, 1985; 53 FR 52591, Dec. 28, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 226.17  Child care center provisions.

    (a) Child care centers may participate in the Program either as 
independent centers or under the auspices of a sponsoring organization; 
provided, however, that public and private nonprofit centers shall not 
be eligible to participate in the Program under the auspices of a for-
profit sponsoring organization. Child care centers participating as 
independent centers shall comply with the provisions of Sec. 226.15.
    (b) All child care centers, independent or sponsored, shall meet the 
following requirements
    (1) Child care centers shall have Federal, State, or local licensing 
or approval to provide day care services to children. Child care centers 
which are complying with applicable procedures to renew licensing or 
approval may participate in the Program during the renewal process, 
unless the State agency has information which indicates that renewal 
will be denied. If licensing or approval is not available, a center may 
participate if:
    (i) It receives title XX funds for child care; or
    (ii) It demonstrates compliance with the CACFP child care standards 
or any applicable State or local child care standards to the State 
agency.
    (2) Except for proprietary title XX centers, child care centers 
shall be public, or have tax exempt status under the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1954, or be moving toward compliance with the requirements for 
tax-exempt status, or be currently operating another Federal program 
requiring nonprofit status. A child care center which has applied to the 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) for tax-exempt status may participate in 
the Program while its application is pending review by IRS. If IRS 
denies the application for tax-exempt status, the child care center 
shall immediately notify the State agency of such denial and the State 
agency shall terminate

[[Page 193]]

the participation of the child care center. If IRS certification of 
nonprofit status has not been received within 12 months of filing the 
application with IRS, and IRS indicates that the child care center has 
failed to provide all required information, the State agency shall 
terminate the participation of the child care center until such time as 
IRS tax-exempt status is obtained.
    (3) Each child care center participating in the Program shall serve 
one or more of the following meal types: (i) Breakfast, (ii) lunch, 
(iii) supper, and (iv) supplemental food. Reimbursement shall not be 
claimed for more than two meals and one supplement provided daily to 
each child, except that reimbursement may be claimed for two meals and 
two supplements or three meals and one supplement served to a child for 
each day in which that child is maintained in care for eight or more 
hours.
    (4) Each child care center participating in the Program shall claim 
only the meal types specified in its approved application in accordance 
with the meal pattern requirements specified in Sec. 226.20. 
Reimbursement may not be claimed for meals served to children who are 
not enrolled, or for meals served to children at any one time in excess 
of the child care center's authorized capacity, or for any meal served 
at a proprietary title XX center during a calendar month when less than 
25 percent of enrolled children were title XX beneficiaries. Menus and 
any other nutritional records required by the State agency shall be 
maintained to document compliance with such requirements.
    (5) A child care center with pre-school children may also be 
approved to serve a breakfast, supplement, and supper to school-age 
children enrolled in an outside-school-hours care program meeting the 
criteria of Sec. 226.19(b) which is distinct from its day care program 
for preschool-age children. The State agency may authorize the service 
of lunch to such enrolled children who attend a school which does not 
offer a lunch program provided the limit of not more than two meals and 
one supplement per child per day is not exceeded. If the majority of 
children served by the center are participating in an outside-school-
hours care program, the center shall comply with reporting requirements 
of Sec. 226.19 and, if it is a facility, shall be monitored by the 
sponsoring organization at the frequency specified in 
Sec. 226.16(d)(4)(iii).
    (6) A child care center may utilize existing school food service 
facilities or obtain meals from a school food service facility, and the 
pertinent requirements of this part shall be embodied in a written 
agreement between the child care center and school. The center shall 
maintain responsibility for all Program requirements set forth in this 
part.
    (7) Child care centers shall collect and maintain documentation of 
the enrollment of each child, including information used to determine 
eligibility for free and reduced price meals in accordance with 
Sec. 226.23(e)(1).
    (8) Each child care center shall maintain daily records of the 
number of meals by type (breakfast, lunch, supper, and supplements) 
served to enrolled children, and to adults performing labor necessary to 
the food service.

[47 FR 36527, Aug. 20, 1982, as amended at 52 FR 36907, Oct. 2, 1987; 53 
FR 52591, Dec. 28, 1988; 54 FR 26724, June 26, 1989; Amdt. 22, 55 FR 
1378, Jan. 14, 1990; 61 FR 25554, May 22, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 226.18  Day care home provisions.

    (a) Day care homes shall have current Federal, State or local 
licensing or approval to provide day care services to children. Day care 
homes which are complying with applicable procedures to renew licensing 
or approval may participate in the Program during the renewal process, 
unless the State agency has information which indicates that renewal 
will be denied. If licensing or approval is not available, a day care 
home may participate in the Program if:
    (1) It receives title XX funds for providing child care; or
    (2) It demonstrates compliance with CACFP child care standards or 
applicable State or local child care standards to the State agency.
    (b) Day care homes participating in the program shall operate under 
the auspices of a public or private nonprofit sponsoring organization. 
Sponsoring organizations shall enter into a

[[Page 194]]

written agreement with each sponsored day care home which specifies the 
rights and responsibilities of both parties. This agreement shall be 
developed by the State agency, unless the State agency elects, at the 
request of the sponsor, to approve an agreement developed by the 
sponsor. At a minimum, the agreement shall embody:
    (1) The right of the sponsoring organization, the State agency, and 
the Department to visit the day care home and review its meal service 
and records during its hours of child care operations;
    (2) The responsibility of the sponsoring organization to train the 
day care home's staff in program requirements;
    (3) The responsibility of the day care home to prepare and serve 
meals which meet the meal patterns specified in Sec. 226.20;
    (4) The responsibility of the day care home to maintain records of 
menus, and of the number of meals, by type, served to enrolled children;
    (5) The responsibility of the day care home to promptly inform the 
sponsoring organization about any change in the number of children 
enrolled for care or in its licensing or approval status;
    (6) The meal types approved for reimbursement to the day care home 
by the State agency;
    (7) The right of the day care home to receive in a timely manner the 
full food service rate for each meal served to enrolled children for 
which the sponsoring organization has received payment from the State 
agency. However, if, with the home provider's consent, the sponsoring 
organization will incur costs for the provision of program foodstuffs or 
meals in behalf of the home, and subtract such costs from Program 
payments to the home, the particulars of this arrangement shall be 
specified in the agreement;
    (8) The right of the sponsoring organization or the day care home to 
terminate the agreement for cause or, subject to stipulations by the 
State agency, convenience; and
    (9) A prohibition of any sponsoring organization fee to the day care 
home for its Program administrative services.
    (10) If the State agency has approved a time limit for submission of 
meal records by day care homes, that time limit shall be stated in the 
agreement.
    (c) Each day care home shall serve one or more of the following meal 
types:
    (1) Breakfast,
    (2) Lunch,
    (3) Supper and
    (4) Supplemental food.

Reimbursement shall not be claimed for more than two meals and one 
supplement provided daily to each child.
    (d) Each day care home participating in the program shall serve the 
meal types specified in its approved application in accordance with the 
meal pattern requirements specified in Sec. 226.20. Menu records shall 
be maintained to document compliance with these requirements. Meals 
shall be served at no separate charge to enrolled children;
    (e) Each day care home shall maintain daily records of the number of 
children in attendance and the number of meals, by type, served to 
enrolled children. Payment may be made for meals served to the 
provider's own children only when (1) such children are enrolled and 
participating in the child care program during the time of the meal 
service, (2) enrolled nonresident children are present and participating 
in the child care program and (3) providers' children are eligible to 
receive free or reduced-price meals. Reimbursement may not be claimed 
for meals served to children who are not enrolled, or for meals served 
at any one time to children in excess of the home's authorized capacity 
or for meals served to providers' children who are not eligible for free 
or reduced-price meals.
    (f) The State agency may not require a day care home or sponsoring 
organization to maintain documentation of home operating costs. The 
State agency may not require a sponsoring organization to provide family 
size and income data on children enrolled in homes under its 
jurisdiction except in the case of providers' own children for the 
purpose of determining the eligibility of such children for program 
participation, in which case the day care home must maintain 
documentation of the information used to determine the

[[Page 195]]

eligibility of enrolled providers' children for free or reduced price 
meals in accordance with Sec. 226.23(e)(1).

[47 FR 36527, Aug. 20, 1982, as amended by Amdt. 5, 49 FR 18989, May 4, 
1984; 50 FR 8580, Mar. 4, 1985; 52 FR 36907, Oct. 2, 1987; Amdt. 22, 55 
FR 1378, Jan. 14, 1990; 61 FR 25554, May 22, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 226.19  Outside-school-hours care center provisions.

    (a) Outside-school-hours care centers may participate in the Program 
either as independent centers or under the auspices of a sponsoring 
organization; Provided, however, That public and private nonprofit 
centers shall not be eligible to participate in the Program under the 
auspices of a for-profit sponsoring organization. Outside-school-hours 
care centers participating as independent centers shall comply with the 
provisions of Sec. 226.15.
    (b) All outside-school-hours care centers, independent or sponsored, 
shall meet the following requirements:
    (1) Outside-school-hours care centers shall have current Federal, 
State or local licensing or approval to provide organized child care 
services to enrolled school-age children outside of school hours. The 
main purpose of the Program shall be the care and supervision of 
children. Outside-school-hours care centers which are complying with 
applicable procedures to renew licensing or approval may participate in 
the Program during the renewal process, unless the State agency has 
information which indicates the renewal will be denied. If licensing or 
approval is not available, an outside-school-hours care center may 
participate in the Program if:
    (i) It receives title XX funds for providing child care; or
    (ii) It demonstrates compliance with CACFP child care standards or 
any applicable State or local child care standards to the State agency.
    (2) Except for proprietary title XX centers, outside-school-hours 
care centers shall be public, or have tax-exempt status under the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1954, or be moving toward compliance with the 
requirements for tax-exempt status, or be currently participating in 
another Federal program requiring nonprofit status. Centers which have 
applied to IRS for tax-exempt status may participate in the Program 
while their application is pending review by IRS. If IRS denies the 
application, the center shall immediately notify the State agency of 
such denial and the State agency shall terminate the participation of 
the center. If IRS certification of nonprofit status has not been 
received within 12 months of filing the application with IRS and IRS 
indicates that the center has failed to provide all required 
information, the State agency shall terminate the participation of the 
center in the Program until such time as IRS certification is obtained.
    (3) Nonresidential public or private nonprofit schools which provide 
organized child care programs for school children may participate in the 
Program as outside-school-hours care centers if:
    (i) Children are enrolled in a regularly scheduled child care 
program which meets the criteria of paragraph (b)(1) of this section. 
The program is organized for the purpose of providing child care 
services and is distinct from any extracurricular programs organized 
primarily for scholastic, cultural, and athletic purposes; and
    (ii) Separate Program records are maintained.
    (4) Outside-school-hours care centers shall be eligible to serve one 
or more of the following meal types: breakfasts, supplements and 
suppers. In addition, outside-school-hours care centers shall be 
eligible to serve lunches to enrolled children during periods of school 
vacation, including weekends and holidays, and to enrolled children 
attending schools which do not offer a lunch program. Notwithstanding 
the eligibility of outside-school-hours care centers to serve Program 
meals to children on school vacation, including holidays and weekends, 
such centers shall not operate under the Program on weekends only.
    (5) Each outside-school-hours care center participating in the 
Program shall claim only the meal types specified in its approved 
application and served in compliance with the meal pattern requirements 
of Sec. 226.20. Reimbursement shall not be claimed for

[[Page 196]]

more than two meals and one supplement provided daily to each child, 
except that reimbursement may be claimed for two meals and two 
supplements or three meals and one supplement served to a child for each 
day in which that child is maintained in care for eight or more hours. 
In addition, reimbursement shall not be claimed for meals served to 
children who are not enrolled, for meals served to children at any one 
time in excess of authorized capacity, or for any meal served at a 
proprietary title XX center during a calendar month when less than 25 
percent of enrolled children were title XX beneficiaries.
    (6) Three hours shall elapse between the beginning of one meal 
service and the beginning of another, except that 4 hours shall elapse 
between the service of a lunch and supper when no supplement is served 
between lunch and supper. The service of a supper shall begin no later 
than 7 p.m. and end no later than 8 p.m. The duration of the meal 
service shall be limited to 2 hours for lunches and supper and 1 hour 
for other meals.
    (7) Each outside-school-hours care center shall ensure that each 
meal service is supervised by an adequate number of operational 
personnel trained in Program requirements. Operational personnel shall 
ensure that:
    (i) Meals are served only to children enrolled for care and adults 
who perform necessary food service labor; (ii) meals served to children 
meet the meal pattern requirements specified in Sec. 226.20; (iii) each 
meal service is consistent with the meal time requirements of paragraph 
(b)(7) of this section; (iv) meals served are consumed on the premises 
of the centers; (v) accurate records are maintained; and (vi) the number 
of meals prepared or ordered is promptly adjusted on the basis of 
participation trends.
    (8) Each outside-school-hours care center shall accurately maintain 
the following records:
    (i) Documentation of enrollment for all children, including 
information used to determine eligibility for free or reduced price 
meals in accordance with Sec. 226.23(e)(1);
    (ii) Number of meals prepared or delivered for each meal service;
    (iii) Daily menu records for each meal service;
    (iv) Number of meals served to enrolled children at each meal 
service;
    (v) Number of enrolled children in attendance during each meal 
service;
    (vi) Number of meals served to adults performing necessary food 
service labor for each meal service; and
    (vii) All other records required by the State agency financial 
management system.
    (9) An outside-school-hours care center may utilize existing school 
food service facilities or obtain meals from a school food service 
facility, and the pertinent requirements of this part shall be embodied 
in a written agreement between the outside-school-hours care center and 
the school. The center shall maintain responsibility for all Program 
requirements set forth in this part.

[47 FR 36527, Aug. 20, 1982, as amended at 52 FR 36907, Oct. 2, 1987; 54 
FR 26724, June 26, 1989; Amdt. 22, 55 FR 1378, Jan. 14, 1990; 56 FR 
58175, Nov. 16, 1991; 61 FR 25554, May 22, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 226.19a  Adult day care center provisions.

    (a) Adult day care centers may participate in the Program either as 
independent centers or under the auspices of a sponsoring organization; 
provided, however, that public and private nonprofit centers shall not 
be eligible to participate in the Program under the auspices of a for-
profit sponsoring organization. Adult day care centers participating as 
independent centers shall comply with the provisions of Sec. 226.15.
    (b) All adult day care centers, independent or sponsored, shall meet 
the following requirements:
    (1) Adult day care centers shall provide a community-based group 
program designed to meet the needs of functionally impaired adults 
through an individual plan of care. Such a program shall be a 
structured, comprehensive program that provides a variety of health, 
social and related support services to enrolled adult participants.
    (2) Adult day care centers shall provide care and services directly 
or under arrangements made by the agency or

[[Page 197]]

organization whereby the agency or organization maintains professional 
management responsibility for all such services.
    (3) Adult day care centers shall have Federal, State or local 
licensing or approval to provide day care services to functionally 
impaired adults (as defined in Sec. 226.2) or individuals 60 years of 
age or older in a group setting outside their home on a less than 24-
hour basis. Adult day care centers which are complying with applicable 
procedures to renew licensing or approval may participate in the Program 
during the renewal process, unless the State agency has information 
which indicates that renewal will be denied.
    (4) Except for proprietary title XIX or title XX centers, adult day 
care centers shall be public, or have tax-exempt status under the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1954, or be moving toward compliance with the 
requirements for tax-exempt status, or be currently operating another 
Federal program requiring nonprofit status. An adult day care center 
which has applied to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) for tax-exempt 
status may participate in the Program while its application is pending 
review by IRS. If IRS denies the application for tax-exempt status, the 
adult day care center shall immediately notify the State agency of such 
denial and the State agency shall terminate the participation of the 
center. If IRS certification of nonprofit status has not been received 
within 12 months of filing the application with IRS, and IRS indicates 
that the adult day care center has failed to provide all required 
information, the State agency shall terminate the participation of the 
adult day care center until such time as IRS tax-exempt status is 
obtained.
    (5) Each adult day care center participating in the Program shall 
serve one or more of the following meal types:
    (i) Breakfast,
    (ii) Lunch,
    (iii) Supper, and
    (iv) Supplemental food.

Reimbursement shall not be claimed for more than two meals and one 
supplement provided daily to each adult participant.
    (6) Each adult day care center participating in the Program shall 
claim only the meal types specified in its approved application in 
accordance with the meal pattern requirements specified in Sec. 226.20. 
Participating centers may not claim CACFP reimbursement for meals 
claimed under part C of title III of the Older Americans Act of 1965. 
Reimbursement may not be claimed for meals served to persons who are not 
enrolled, or for meals served to participants at any one time in excess 
of the center's authorized capacity, or for any meal served at a 
proprietary title XIX or title XX center during a calendar month when 
less than 25 percent of enrolled participants were title XIX or title XX 
beneficiaries. Menus and any other nutritional records required by the 
State agency shall be maintained to document compliance with such 
requirements.
    (7) An adult day care center may obtain meals from a school food 
service facility, and the pertinent requirements of this part shall be 
embodied in a written agreement between the center and school. The 
center shall maintain responsibility for all Program requirements set 
forth in this part.
    (8) Adult day care centers shall collect and maintain documentation 
of the enrollment of each adult participant including information used 
to determine eligibility for free and reduced price meals in accordance 
with Sec. 226.23(e)(1).
    (9) Each adult day care center shall maintain daily records of the 
number of meals by type (breakfast, lunch, supper, and supplements) 
served to enrolled participants, and to adults performing labor 
necessary to the food service.
    (10) Each adult day care center shall maintain records on the age of 
each enrolled person. In addition, each adult day care center shall 
maintain records which demonstrate that each enrolled person under the 
age of 60 meets the functional impairment eligibility requirements 
established under the definition of ``functionally impaired adult'' 
contained in this part.

[53 FR 52591, Dec. 28, 1988, as amended by Amdt. 22, 55 FR 1378, Jan. 
14, 1990; 61 FR 25554, May 22, 1996]

[[Page 198]]


<R05>
Sec. 226.20  Requirements for meals.

    (a) Except as otherwise provided in this section, each meal served 
in the Program shall contain, as a minimum, the indicated food 
components:
    (1) A breakfast shall contain: (i) Fluid milk as a beverage or on 
cereal, or used in part for each purpose;
    (ii) Vegetable(s) or fruit(s) or full-strength vegetable or fruit 
juice, or any combination of these foods;
    (iii) Whole-grain or enriched bread; or cornbread, biscuits, rolls, 
muffins, etc., made with whole-grain or enriched meal or flour; or 
whole-grain or enriched or fortified cereal; or cooked whole-grain or 
enriched pasta or noodle products such as macaroni, or cereal grains 
such as rice, bulgur, or corn grits; or any combination of these foods.
    (2) Lunch shall contain: (i) Fluid milk as a beverage;
    (ii)(A) Lean meat, poultry or fish; or cheese; or an egg; or cooked 
dry beans or peas; or peanut butter; or any combination of these foods. 
These foods must be served in a main dish, or in a main dish and one 
other menu item, to meet this requirement. Cooked dry beans or dry peas 
may be used as the meat alternate or as part of the vegetable/fruit 
component but not as both food components in the same meal;
    (B) Nuts and seeds and their butters listed in program guidance are 
nutritionally comparable to meat or other meat alternates based on 
available nutritional data. Acorns, chestnuts, and coconuts shall not be 
used as meat alternates due to their low protein content. Nut or seed 
meals or flours may be used as an ingredient in a bread/bread alternate, 
but shall not be used as a meat alternate except as defined in this part 
under Appendix A: Alternate Foods for Meals, and in program guidance 
materials. As noted in paragraph (c)(2) of this section, nuts or seeds 
may be used to meet no more than one-half of the meat/meat alternate 
requirements. Therefore, nuts or seeds must be combined with another 
meat/meat alternate to fulfill the requirement;
    (iii) Two or more vegetables or fruits, or a combination of both. 
Full-strength vegetable or fruit juice may be counted to meet not more 
than one-half of this requirement;
    (iv) Whole-grain or enriched bread; or cornbread, biscuits, rolls, 
muffins, etc., made with whole-grain or enriched meal or flour; or 
whole-grain or enriched pasta or noodle products such as macaroni, or 
cereal grains such as rice, bulgur, or corn grits; or any combination of 
these foods.
    (3) Supper shall contain the food components and servings listed for 
lunch in Sec. 226.20(a)(2), except that, for adult participants in adult 
day care centers, it does not require a serving of fluid milk.
    (4) Supplemental food shall contain two of the following four 
components:
    (i) Fluid milk as a beverage, or on cereal, or used in part for each 
purpose;
    (ii) Meat or meat alternate. Nuts and seeds and their butters listed 
in program guidance are nutritionally comparable to meat or other meat 
alternates based on available nutritional data. Acorns, chestnuts, and 
coconuts are excluded and shall not be used as meat alternates due to 
their low protein content. Nut or seed meals or flours shall not be used 
as a meat alternate except as defined in this part under Appendix A: 
Alternate Foods for Meals;
    (iii) Vegetable(s) or fruit(s) or full-strength vegetable or fruit 
juice, or any combination of these foods. For children, juice may not be 
served when milk is served as the only other component;
    (iv) Whole-grain or enriched bread; or cornbread, biscuits, rolls, 
muffins, etc., made with whole-grain or enriched meal or flour; or 
cooked whole-grain or enriched pasta or noodle products such as 
macaroni, or cereal grains such as rice, bulgar, or corn grits; or any 
combination of these foods.
    (b) Infant meal pattern. When infants from birth through 11 months 
of age participate in the Program, an infant meal shall be offered. 
Foods within the infant meal pattern shall be of texture and consistency 
appropriate for the particular age group being served, and shall be 
served during a span of time consistent with the infant's eating habits. 
For infants 4 through 7 months of age, solid foods are optional and 
should

[[Page 199]]

be introduced only if the infant is developmentally ready. Whenever 
possible the child care facility should consult with the infant's parent 
in making the decision to introduce solid foods. Solid foods should be 
introduced one at a time on a gradual basis with the intent of ensuring 
health and nutritional well-being. For infants 8 through 11 months of 
age, the total amount of food authorized in the meal patterns set forth 
below must be provided in order to qualify for reimbursement. Additional 
foods may be served to infants 4 months of age and older with the intent 
of improving their overall nutrition. Breast milk, provided by the 
infant's mother, may be served in place of infant formula from birth 
through 11 months of age. However, meals containing only breast milk do 
not qualify for reimbursement. Meals containing breast milk served to 
infants 4 months of age or older may be claimed for reimbursement when 
the other meal component or components are supplied by the child care 
facility. Although it is recommended that either breast milk or iron-
fortified infant formula be served for the entire first year, whole milk 
may be served beginning at 8 months of age as long as infants are 
consuming one-third of their calories as a balanced mixture of cereal, 
fruits, vegetables, and other foods in order to ensure adequate sources 
of iron and vitaman C. Juice should not be offered to infants until they 
are ready to drink from a cup, in order to develop behaviors that may 
prevent baby bottle tooth decay. The infant meal pattern shall contain, 
as a minimum, each of the following components in the amounts indicated 
for the appropriate age group:
    (1) Birth through 3 months. (i) Breakfast--4 to 6 fluid ounces of 
iron-fortified infant formula;
    (ii) Lunch or supper--4 to 6 fluid ounces of iron-fortified infant 
formula;
    (iii) Supplemental food--4 to 6 fluid ounces of iron-fortified 
infant formula.
    (2) 4 through 7 months. (i) Breakfast--4 to 8 fluid ounces of iron-
fortified infant formula; and 0 to 3 tablespoons of iron-fortified dry 
infant cereal (optional);
    (ii) Lunch or supper--4 to 8 fluid ounces of iron-fortified infant 
formula; and 0 to 3 tablespoons of iron-fortified dry infant cereal 
(optional); and 0 to 3 tablespoons of fruit or vegetable of appropriate 
consistency or a combination of both (optional);
    (iii) Supplemental food--4 to 6 fluid ounces of iron-fortified 
infant formula.
    (3) 8 through 11 months. (i) Breakfast--6 to 8 fluid ounces of iron-
fortified infant formula or 6 to 8 fluid ounces whole milk; 2 to 4 
tablespoons of iron-fortified dry infant cereal; and 1 to 4 tablespoons 
of fruit or vegetable of appropriate consistency or a combination of 
both;
    (ii) Lunch or supper--6 to 8 fluid ounces of iron-fortified infant 
formula or 6 to 8 fluid ounces whole milk; 2 to 4 tablespoons of iron-
fortified dry infant cereal and/or 1 to 4 tablespoons of meat, fish, 
poultry, egg yolk, or cooked dry beans or peas, or \1/2\ to 2 ounces 
(weight) of cheese or 1 to 4 ounces (weight or volume) of cottage cheese 
or cheese food or cheese spread of appropriate consistency; and 1 to 4 
tablespoons of fruit or vegetable of appropriate consistency or a 
combination of both;
    (iii) Supplemental food--2 to 4 fluid ounces of iron-fortified 
infant formula, whole milk, or full strength fruit juice and 0 to \1/2\ 
slice of crusty bread (optional) or 0 to 2 cracker type products 
(optional) made from whole-grain or enriched meal or flour and which are 
suitable for an infant for use as a finger food.
    (4) The minimum amount of food components to be served as breakfast, 
lunch, supper or supplement as set forth in paragraphs (b), (1), (2), 
and (3) of this section are as follows:

                                         Child Care Infant Meal Pattern                                         
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                        Birth through 3 months     4 through 7 months      8 through 11 months  
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Breakfast............................  4-6 fl.oz. formula \1\.  4-8 fl.oz. formula \1\   6-8 fl.oz. formula \1\ 
                                                                 or breast milk.          breast milk, or whole 
                                                                                          milk.                 

[[Page 200]]

                                                                                                                
                                                                0-3 Tbsp. infant cereal  2-4 Tbsp. infant cereal
                                                                 \2\ (optional).          \2\.                  
                                                                                         1-4 Tbsp. fruit and/or 
                                                                                          vegetable.            
Lunch or supper......................  4-6 fl.oz. formula \1\.  4-8 fl.oz. formula \1\   6-8 fl.oz. formula \1\ 
                                                                 or breast milk.          breast milk, or whole 
                                                                                          milk.                 
                                                                0-3 Tbsp. infant cereal  2-4 Tbsp. infant cereal
                                                                 \2\ (optional).          \2\                   
                                                                                         and/or                 
                                                                0-3 Tbsp. fruit and/or   1-4 Tbsp. meat, fish,  
                                                                 vegetable (optional).    poultry, egg yolk, or 
                                                                                          cooked dry beans or   
                                                                                          peas, or              
                                                                                         1/2-2 oz. cheese or    
                                                                                         1-4 oz. cottage cheese,
                                                                                          cheese food, or cheese
                                                                                          spread                
                                                                                         1-4 Tbsp. fruit and/or 
                                                                                          vegetable.            
Supplement...........................  4-6 fl.oz. formula \1\.  4-6 fl.oz. formula \1\.  2-4 fl.oz. formula,\1\ 
                                                                                          breast milk, whole    
                                                                                          milk, or fruit juice  
                                                                                          \3\.                  
                                                                                         0-\1/2\ bread or       
                                                                                         0-2 crackers           
                                                                                          (optional).           
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Shall be iron-fortified infant formula.                                                                     
\2\ Shall be iron-fortified dry infant cereal.                                                                  
\3\ Shall be full-strength fruit juice.                                                                         
\4\ Shall be from whole-grain or enriched meal or flour.                                                        

    (c) Meal patterns for children age one through 12 and adult 
participants. When individuals over age one participate in the Program, 
the total amount of food authorized in the meal patterns set forth below 
shall be provided in order to qualify for reimbursement.

                                Breakfast

    (1) The minimum amount of food components to be served as breakfast 
as set forth in paragraph (a)(1) of this section are as follows:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                           Age 6 through 12                     
         Food components              Age 1 and 2       Age 3 through 5           \1\         Adult participants
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Milk                                                                                              
Milk, fluid.....................  \1/2\ cup \2\.....  \3/4\ cup.........  1 cup.............  1 cup.\2\         
                                                                                                                
      Vegetables and Fruits                                                                                     
                                                                                                                
Vegetable(s) and/or Fruit(s)....  \1/4\ cup.........  \1/2\ cup.........  \1/2\ cup.........  \1/2\ cup.        
               or                                                                                               
Full-strength vegetable or fruit                                                                                
 juice or an equivalent quantity                                                                                
 of any combination of                                                                                          
 vegetable(s), fruit(s), and                                                                                    
 juice.                                                                                                         
                                  \1/4\ cup.........  \1/2\ cup.........  \1/2\ cup.........  \1/2\ cup.        
 Bread and Bread Alternates \3\                                                                                 
                                                                                                                
Bread...........................  \1/2\ slice.......  \1/2\ slice.......  1 slice...........  2 slices          
                                                                                               (servings).      
               or                                                                                               
Cornbread, biscuits, rolls,       \1/2\ serving.....  \1/2\ serving.....  1 serving.........  2 servings.       
 muffins, etc.\4\.                                                                                              
               or                                                                                               
Cold dry cereal \5\.............  \1/4\ cup or \1/3\  \1/3\ cup or \1/2\  \3/4\ cup or 1 oz.  1\1/2\ cups or 2  
                                   oz.                 oz.                                     oz.              
               or                                                                                               
Cooked cereal...................  \1/4\ cup.........  \1/4\ cup.........  \1/2\ cup.........  1 cup.            
               or                                                                                               
Cooked pasta or noodle products.  \1/4\ cup.........  \1/4\ cup.........  \1/2\ cup.........  1 cup.            
               or                                                                                               
Cooked cereal grains or an        \1/4\ cup.........  \1/4\ cup.........  \1/2\ cup.........  1 cup.            
 equivalent quantity of any                                                                                     
 combination of bread/bread                                                                                     
 alternate.                                                                                                     
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Children age 12 and up may be served adult size portions based on the greater food needs of older boys and  
  girls, but shall be served not less than the minimum quantities specified in this section for children age 6  
  up to 12.                                                                                                     
\2\ For purposes of the requirements outlined in this subsection, a cup means a standard measuring cup.         
\3\ Bread, pasta or noodle products, and cereal grains, shall be wholegrain or enriched; cornbread, biscuits,   
  rolls, muffins, etc., shall be made with wholegrain or enriched meal or flour; cereal shall be wholegrain or  
  enriched or fortified.                                                                                        
\4\ Serving sizes and equivalents to be published in guidance materials by FCS.                                 
\5\ Either volume (cup) or weight (oz.) whichever is less.                                                      


[[Page 201]]

                                  Lunch

    (2) The minimum amounts of food components to be served as lunch as 
set forth in paragraph (a)(2) of this section are as follows:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                           Age 6 through 12                     
         Food components              Age 1 and 2       Age 3 through 5           \1\         Adult participants
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Milk                                                                                              
Milk, fluid.....................  \1/2\ cup \2\.....  \3/4\ cup.........  1 cup.............  1 cup.\2\         
    Vegetables and Fruits \3\                                                                                   
Vegetable(s) and/or fruit(s)....  \1/4\ cup total...  \1/2\ cup total...  \3/4\ cup total...  1 cup total.      
 Bread and Bread Alternates \4\                                                                                 
Bread...........................  \1/2\ slice.......  \1/2\ slice.......  1 slice...........  2 slices          
                                                                                               (servings).      
               or                                                                                               
Cornbread, biscuits, roll,        \1/2\ serving.....  \1/2\ serving.....  1 serving.........  2 servings.       
 muffins, etc.\5\.                                                                                              
               or                                                                                               
Cooked pasta or noodle products.  \1/4\ cup.........  \1/4\ cup.........  \1/2\ cup.........  1 cup.            
               or                                                                                               
Cooked cereal grains or an        \1/4\ cup.........  \1/4\ cup.........  \1/2\ cup.........  1 cup.            
 equivalent quantity of any                                                                                     
 combination of bread/bread                                                                                     
 alternate.                                                                                                     
    Meat and Meat Alternates                                                                                    
                                                                                                                
Lean meat or poultry or fish \6\  1 oz..............  1\1/2\ oz.........  2 oz..............  2 oz.             
               or                                                                                               
Cheese..........................  1 oz..............  1\1/2\ oz.........  2 oz..............  2 oz.             
               or                                                                                               
Eggs............................  1 egg.............  1 egg.............  1 egg.............  1 egg.            
               or                                                                                               
Cooked dry beans or peas........  \1/4\cup..........  \3/8\ cup.........  \1/2\ cup.........  \1/2\ cup.        
               or                                                                                               
Peanut butter or soynut butter    2 tbsp............  3 tbsp............  4 tbsp............   4 tbsp.          
 or other nut or seed butters.                                                                                  
               or                                                                                               
Peanuts or soynuts or tree nuts   \1/2\ oz \8\ = 50%  \3/4\ oz \8\ = 50%  1 oz \8\ = 50%....  1 oz=50 percent.  
 or seeds.\7\.                                                                                                  
               or                                                                                               
An equivalent quantity of any                                                                                   
 combination of the above meat/                                                                                 
 meat alternates.                                                                                               
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Children age 12 and up may be served adult size portions based on the greater food needs of older boys and  
  girls, but shall be served not less than the minimum quantities specified in this section for children age 6  
  up to 12.                                                                                                     
\2\ For purposes of the requirements outlined in this subsection, a cup means a standard measuring cup.         
\3\ Serve 2 or more kinds of vegetable(s) and/or fruit(s). Full-strength vegetable or fruit juice may be counted
  to meet not more than one-half of this requirement.                                                           
\4\ Bread, pasta or noodle products, and cereal grains shall be wholegrain or enriched, cornbread, biscuits,    
  rolls, muffins, etc., shall be made with wholegrain or enriched meal or flour.                                
\5\ Serving sizes equivalents to be published in guidance materials by FCS.                                     
\6\ Edible portion as served.                                                                                   
\7\ Tree nuts and seeds that may be used as meat alternates are listed in program guidance.                     
\8\ No more than 50% of the requirement shall be met with nuts or seeds. Nuts or seeds shall be combined with   
  another meat/meat alternate to fulfill the requirement. For purpose of determining combinations, 1 oz. of nuts
  or seeds is equal to 1 oz. of cooked lean meat, poultry or fish.                                              

    (3) The minimum amounts of food components to be served as supper as 
set forth in paragraph (a)(3) of this section are as follows:

                                                     SUPPER                                                     
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Children ages 1 and    Children ages 3     Children ages 6                     
        Food components                   2                through 5        through 12 \1\    Adult participants
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
              MILK                                                                                              
Milk, fluid....................  \1/2\ cup \2\......  \3/4\ cup.........  1 cup.............  None.             
                                                                                                                
   VEGETABLES AND FRUITS \3\                                                                                    
Vegetable(s) and/or fruit(s)...  \1/4\ cup total....  \1/2\ cup total...  \3/4\ cup total...  1 cup total.      
                                                                                                                
 BREAD AND BREAD ALTERNATES \4\                                                                                 
Bread..........................  \1/2\ slice........  \1/2\ slice.......  1 slice...........  2 slices          
                                                                                               (servings).      
      or                                                                                                        
Cornbread, biscuits, rolls,      \1/2\ serving......  \1/2\ serving.....  1 serving.........  2 servings.       
 muffins, etc \5\.                                                                                              
      or                                                                                                        
Cooked cereal or grains or an    \1/4\ cup..........  \1/4\ cup.........  \1/2\ cup.........  1 cup.            
 equivalent quantity of any                                                                                     
 combination of bread/bread                                                                                     
 alternates.                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                

[[Page 202]]

                                                                                                                
    MEAT AND MEAT ALTERNATES                                                                                    
Lean meat or poultry or fish     1 oz...............  1 \1/2\ oz........  2 oz..............  2 oz.             
 \6\.                                                                                                           
      or                                                                                                        
Cheese.........................  1 oz...............  1 \1/2\ oz........  2 oz..............  2 oz.             
      or                                                                                                        
Eggs...........................   1 egg.............  1 egg.............  1 egg.............  1 egg.            
      or                                                                                                        
Cooked dry beans or peas.......  \1/4\ cup..........  \3/8\ cup.........  \1/2\ cup.........  \1/2\ cup.        
      or                                                                                                        
Peanut butter or soynut butter    2 tbsp............  3 tbsp............  4 tbsp............  4 tbsp.           
 or other nut or seed butters.                                                                                  
      or                                                                                                        
Peanuts or soynuts or tree nuts  \1/2\ oz=50          \3/4\ oz=50         1 oz=50             1 oz=50           
 or seeds \7\.                    percent.\8\.         percent.\8\.        percent.\8\.        percent.\8\      
      or                                                                                                        
An equivalent quantity of any                                                                                   
 combination of the above meat/                                                                                 
 meat alternates.                                                                                               
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

                            Supplemental Food

    (4) The minimum amounts of food components to be served as 
supplemental food as set forth in paragraph (a)(4) of this section are 
as follows. Select two of the following four components. (For children, 
juice may not be served when milk is served as the only other 
component.)

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                           Age 6 through 12                     
         Food components              Age 1 and 2       Age 3 through 5           \1\          Adult participate
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Milk                                                                                              
Milk, fluid.....................  \1/2\ cup \2\.....  \1/2\ cup.........  1 cup.............  1 cup.\2\         
      Vegetables and Fruits                                                                                     
Vegetable(s) and/or fruit(s)....  \1/2\ cup.........  \1/2\ cup.........  \3/4\ cup.........  \1/2\ cup.        
               or                                                                                               
Full-strength vegetable or fruit  \1/2\ cup.........  \1/2\ cup.........  \3/4\ cup.........  \1/2\ cup.        
 juice or an equivalent quantity                                                                                
 of any combination of                                                                                          
 vegetable(s), fruit(s) and                                                                                     
 juice.                                                                                                         
 Bread and Bread Alternates \3\                                                                                 
Bread...........................  \1/2\ slice.......  \1/2\ slice.......  1 slice...........  1 slice (serving).
               or                                                                                               
Cornbread, biscuits, rolls,       \1/2\ serving.....  \1/2\ serving.....  1 serving.........  1 serving.        
 muffins, etc \4\.                                                                                              
               of                                                                                               
Cold dry cereal \5\.............  \1/4\ cup or \1/3\  \1/3\ cup or \1/2\  \3/4\ cup or 1 oz.  \3/4\ cup or 1 oz.
                                   oz.                 oz.                                                      
               or                                                                                               
Cooked cereal...................  \1/4\ cup.........  \1/4\ cup.........  \1/2\ cup.........  \1/2\ cup.        
               or                                                                                               
Cooked pasta or noodle products.  \1/4\ cup.........  \1/4\ cup.........  \1/2\ cup.........  \1/2\ cup.        
               or                                                                                               
Cooked cereal grains or an        \1/4\ cup.........  \1/4\ cup.........  \1/2\ cup.........  \1/2\ cup.        
 equivalent quantity of any                                                                                     
 combination of bread/bread                                                                                     
 alternate.                                                                                                     
    Meat and Meat Alternates                                                                                    
Lean meat or poultry or fish \6\  \1/2\ oz..........  \1/2\ oz..........  1 oz..............  1 oz.             
               or                                                                                               
Cheese..........................  \1/2\ oz..........  \1/2\ oz..........  1 oz..............  1 oz.             
               or                                                                                               
Eggs............................  \1/2\ egg.........  \1/2\ egg.........  1 egg.............  1 egg.            
               or                                                                                               
Cooked dry beans or peas........  \1/8\ cup.........  \1/8\ cup.........  \1/4\ cup.........  \1/4\ cup.        
               or                                                                                               
Peanut butter or soynut butter    1 tbsp............  1 tbsp............  2 tbsp............  2 tbsp.           
 or other nut or seed butters.                                                                                  
               or                                                                                               
Peanuts or soynuts or tree nuts   \1/2\ oz..........  \1/2\ oz..........  1 oz..............  1 oz.             
 or seeds \7\.                                                                                                  
               or                                                                                               
Yogurt, plain, or sweetened and   2 oz or \1/4\ cup.  2 oz or \1/4\ cup.  4 oz or \1/2\ cup.  4 oz or \1/2\ cup.
 flavored.                                                                                                      

[[Page 203]]

                                                                                                                
               or                                                                                               
An equivalent quantity of any                                                                                   
 combination of the meat/meat                                                                                   
 alternates .                                                                                                   
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Children age 12 and up may be served adult size portions based on the greater food needs of older boys and  
  girls, but shall be served not less than the minimum quantities specified in this section for children age 6  
  up to 12.                                                                                                     
\2\ For purposes of the requirements outlined in this paragraph, a cup means a standard measuring cup.          
\3\ Bread, pasta or noodle products, and cereal grains shall be wholegrain or enriched, cornbread, biscuits,    
  rolls, muffins, etc., shall be made with wholegrain or enriched meal or flour; cereal shall be wholegrain or  
  enriched or fortified.                                                                                        
\4\ Serving size and equivalents to be published in guidance materials by FCS.                                  
\5\ Either volume (cup) or weight (oz.), whichever is less.                                                     
\6\ Edible portion as served.                                                                                   
\7\ Tree nuts and seeds that may be used as meat alternates are listed in program guidance.                     

    (d) Additional food. To improve the nutrition of participating 
children over 1 year of age additional foods may be served with each 
meal as follows:
    (1) Breakfast. Include as often as practical an egg; or a 1-ounce 
serving (edible portion as served) of meat, poultry or fish; or 1-ounce 
of cheese; or 2 tablespoons of peanut butter or an equivalent quantity 
of any combination of these foods. Additional foods may be served as 
desired.
    (2) Lunch, supper or supplemental food. Additional foods may be 
served as desired.
    (e) Temporary unavailability of milk. If emergency conditions 
prevent an institution normally having a supply of milk from temporarily 
obtaining milk deliveries, the State agency may approve the service of 
breakfasts, lunches, or suppers without milk during the emergency 
period.
    (f) Continuing unavailability of milk. The inability of an 
institution to obtain a supply of milk on a continuing basis shall not 
bar it from participation in the Program. In such cases, the State 
agency may approve service of meals without milk, provided that an 
equivalent amount of canned, whole dry or nonfat dry milk is used in the 
preparation of the components of the meal set forth in paragraphs 
(a)(1), (2) and (3) of this section.
    (g) Statewide substitutions. In American Samoa, Puerto Rico, Guam, 
the Virgin Islands, the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, and the 
Northern Mariana Islands the following variations from the meal 
requirements are authorized: A serving of a starchy vegetable, such as 
yams, plantains, or sweet potatoes may be substituted for the bread 
requirements.
    (h) Individual substitutions. Substitutions may be made in food 
listed in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section if individual 
participants are unable, because of medical or other special dietary 
needs, to consume such foods. Substitutions because of medical needs 
shall be made only when supported by a statement from a recognized 
medical authority which includes recommended alternate foods.
    (i) Special variations. FCS may approve variations in the food 
components of the meals on an experimental or a continuing basis in any 
institution where there is evidence that such variations are 
nutritionally sound and are necessary to meet ethnic, religious, 
economic, or physical needs.
    (j) Meal planning. Institutions shall plan for and order meals on 
the basis of current participation trends, with the objective of 
providing only one meal per participant at each meal service. Records of 
participation and of ordering or preparing meals shall be maintained to 
demonstrate positive action toward this objective. In recognition of the 
fluctuation in participation levels which makes it difficult to estimate 
precisely the number of meals needed and to reduce the resultant waste, 
any excess meals that are ordered may be served to participants and may 
be claimed for reimbursement, unless the State agency determines that 
the institution has failed to plan and prepare or order meals with the 
objective of providing only one meal per participant at each meal 
service.
    (k) Sanitation. Institutions shall ensure that in storing, 
preparing, and serving food, proper sanitation and health standards are 
met which conform with all applicable State and local laws and 
regulations. Institutions shall ensure that adequate facilities are 
available to store food or hold meals.

[[Page 204]]

    (l) Donated commodities. Institutions shall efficiently use in the 
Program any foods donated by the Department and accepted by the 
institution.
    (m) Plentiful foods. Institutions shall, insofar as practical, 
purchase and efficiently use in the Program foods designated as 
plentiful by the Department.
    (n) Additional provision. The State agency may allow institutions 
which serve meals prepared in schools participating in the National 
School Lunch and School Breakfast Programs to substitute the meal 
pattern requirements of the regulations governing those Programs (7 CFR 
part 210 and 7 CFR part 220, respectively) for the meal pattern 
requirements contained in this section.
    (o) Family-style meal service. Meals may be served in a family-style 
setting.
    (p) Offer versus serve. (1) Each adult day care center shall offer 
its adult participants all of the required food servings as set forth in 
paragraph (c)(1), (c)(2) and (c)(3) of this section. However, at the 
discretion of the adult day care center, adult participants may be 
permitted to decline:
    (i) One of the four food items (one serving of milk, one serving of 
vegetable and/or fruit, and two servings of bread or bread alternate) 
required at breakfast;
    (ii) Two of the six food items (one serving of milk, two servings of 
vegetable and/or fruit, two servings of bread or bread alternate, and 
one serving of meat or meat alternate) required at lunch;
    (iii) Two of the five food items (two servings of vegetables and/or 
fruit, two servings of bread or bread alternate, and one serving of meat 
or meat alternate) required at supper.
    (2) The price of a reimbursable meal shall not be affected if an 
adult participant declines a food item.

[47 FR 36527, Aug. 20, 1982; 48 FR 40197, Sept. 16, 1983, as amended at 
50 FR 8581, Mar. 4, 1985; 51 FR 16811, May 7, 1986; 51 FR 23515, June 
30, 1986; 53 FR 25308, July 6, 1988; 53 48632, Dec. 2, 1988; 53 FR 
52592, Dec. 28, 1988; 54 FR 27153, June 28, 1989; 58 FR 37850, July 14, 
1993]


<R05>
Sec. 226.21  Food service management companies.

    (a) Any institution may contract with a food service management 
company. An institution which contracts with a food service management 
company shall remain responsible for ensuring that the food service 
operation conforms to its agreement with the State agency. All 
procurements of meals from food service management companies shall 
adhere to the procurement standards set forth in Sec. 226.22. Public 
institutions shall follow applicable State or local laws governing bid 
procedures. In the absence of any applicable State or local laws, and in 
addition to the procurement provisions set forth in Sec. 226.22, the 
State agency may mandate that each institution with Program meal 
contracts of an aggregate value in excess of $10,000 formally advertise 
such contracts and comply with the following procedures intended to 
prevent fraud, waste, and Program abuse:
    (1) All proposed contracts shall be publicly announced at least once 
14 calendar days prior to the opening of bids. The announcement shall 
include the time and place of the bid opening;
    (2) The institution shall notify the State agency at least 14 
calendar days prior to the opening of the bids of the time and place of 
the bid opening;
    (3) The invitation to bid shall not provide for loans or any other 
monetary benefit or terms or conditions to be made to institutions by 
food service management companies;
    (4) Nonfood items shall be excluded from the invitation to bid, 
except where such items are essential to the conduct of the food 
service;
    (5) The invitation to bid shall not specify special meal 
requirements to meet ethnic or religious needs unless special 
requirements are necessary to meet the needs of the participants to be 
served;
    (6) The bid shall be publicly opened;
    (7) All bids totaling $50,000 or more shall be submitted to the 
State agency for approval before acceptance. All bids shall be submitted 
to the State agency for approval before accepting a bid which exceeds 
the lowest bid. State agencies shall respond to any request

[[Page 205]]

for approval within 10 working days of receipt;
    (8) The institutions shall inform the State agency of the reason for 
selecting the food service management company chosen. State agencies may 
require institutions to submit copies of all bids submitted under this 
section.
    (b) The institution and the food service management company shall 
enter into a standard contract as required by Sec. 226.6(i). However, 
public institutions may, with the approval of the State agency, use 
their customary form of contract if it incorporates the provisions of 
Sec. 226.6(i).
    (c) A copy of the contract between each institution and food service 
management company shall be submitted to the State agency prior to the 
beginning of Program operations under the subject contract.
    (d) Each proposed additional provision to the standard form of 
contract shall be submitted to the State agency for approval.
    (e) A food service management company may not subcontract for the 
total meal, with or without milk, or for the assembly of the meal.

[47 FR 36527, Aug. 20, 1982, as amended at 53 FR 52594, Dec. 28, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 226.22   Procurement standards.

    (a) This section establishes standards and guidelines for the 
procurement of foods, supplies, equipment, and other goods and services. 
These standards are furnished to ensure that such materials and services 
are obtained efficiently and economically and in compliance with the 
provisions of applicable Federal law and Executive orders.
    (b) These standards shall not relieve the institution of any 
contractual responsibilities under its contracts. The institution is 
responsible, in accordance with good administrative practice and sound 
business judgment, for the settlement of all contractual and 
administrative issues arising out of procurements entered into in 
support of the Program. These include, but are not limited to: source 
evaluation, protests of award, disputes, and claims. Violations of the 
law shall be referred to the local, State, or Federal authority having 
proper jurisdiction.
    (c) Institutions may use their own procurement procedures which 
reflect applicable State or local laws and regulations, provided that 
procurements made with Program payments conform to the standards set 
forth in this section and in Attachment O of Office of Management and 
Budget Circulars A-102 and A-110, as well as to procurement requirements 
which may be established by the State agency, with the approval of FCS 
to prevent fraud, waste, and Program abuse.
    (d) Institutions shall maintain a written code of standards of 
conduct which shall govern the performance of their officers, employees 
or agents engaged in the award and administration of contracts supported 
by Program payments. No employee, officer or agent of the grantee shall 
participate in selection, or in the award or administration of a 
contract supported by Federal funds if a conflict of interest, real or 
apparent, would be involved. Such a conflict would arise when:
    (1) The employee, officer or agent;
    (2) Any member of his immediate family;
    (3) His or her partner; or
    (4) An organization which employs, or is about to employ, any of the 
above, has a financial or other interest in the firm selected for award.

The institution's officers, employees or agents shall neither solicit 
nor accept gratuities, favors or anything of monetary value from 
contractors, potential contractors, or parties to subagreements. 
Institutions may set minimum rules where the financial interest is not 
substantial or the gift is an unsolicited item of nominal intrinsic 
value. To the extent permitted by State or local law or regulations, 
such standards of conduct shall provide for penalties, sanctions, or 
other disciplinary actions for violations of such standards by the 
institution's officers, employees, or agents, or by contractors or their 
agents.

    (e) The institution shall establish procurement procedures which 
provide that proposed procurement actions shall be reviewed by 
institution officials to avoid the purchase of unnecessary or 
duplicative items. Where appropriate, an analysis shall be made of lease 
versus purchase alternatives, and

[[Page 206]]

any other appropriate analysis to determine which approach would be the 
most economical.
    (f) Affirmative steps shall be taken to assure that small and 
minority businesses are utilized when possible. Affirmative steps shall 
include the following:
    (1) Including qualified small and minority businesses on 
solicitation lists;
    (2) Assuring that small and minority businesses are solicited 
whenever they are potential sources;
    (3) When economically feasible, dividing total requirements into 
smaller tasks or quantities so as to permit maximum small and minority 
business participation;
    (4) Where the requirement permits, establishing delivery schedules 
which will encourage participation by small and minority businesses;
    (5) Using the services and assistance of the Small Business 
Administration and the Minority Business Enterprise of the Department of 
Commerce as required;
    (6) If any subcontracts are to be let, requiring the prime 
contractor to take the affirmative steps in paragraphs (b) (1) through 
(5) of this section; and
    (7) Taking similar appropriate affirmative action in support of 
women's business enterprises.
    (g) All procurement transactions, regardless of whether by sealed 
bids or by negotiation and without regard to dollar value, shall be 
conducted in a manner that provides maximum open and free competition 
consistent with this section. Procurement procedures shall not restrict 
or eliminate competition. Examples of what is considered to be 
restrictive of competition include, but are not limited to (1) placing 
unreasonable requirements on firms in order for them to qualify to do 
business, (2) noncompetitive practices between firms, (3) organizational 
conflicts of interest, and (4) unnecessary experience and bonding 
requirements.
    (h) The institution shall have written selection procedures which 
shall provide, as a minimum, the following procedural requirements:
    (1) Solicitations of offers, whether by competitive sealed bids or 
competitive negotiation, shall:
    (i) Incorporate a clear and accurate description of the technical 
requirements for the material, product, or service to be procured. Such 
description shall not, in competitive procurements, contain features 
which unduly restrict competition. The description may include a 
statement of the qualitative nature of the material, product or service 
to be procured, and when necessary, shall set forth those minimum 
essential characteristics and standards to which it must conform if it 
is to satisfy its intended use. Detailed product specifications should 
be avoided if at all possible. When it is impractical or uneconomical to 
make a clear and accurate description of the technical requirements, a 
``brand name or equal'' description may be used as a means to define the 
performance or other salient requirements of a procurement. The specific 
features of the named brand which must be met by offerors shall be 
clearly stated; and
    (ii) Clearly set forth all requirements which offerors must fulfill 
and all other factors to be used in evaluating bids or proposals.
    (2) Awards shall be made only to responsible contractors that 
possess the potential ability to perform successfully under the terms 
and conditions of a proposed procurement. Consideration shall be given 
to such matters as contractor integrity, compliance with public policy, 
record of past performance, and financial and technical resources.
    (i) Program procurements shall be made by one of the following 
methods:
    (1) Small purchase procedures are those relatively simple and 
informal procurement methods that are sound and appropriate for the 
procurement of services, supplies or other property, costing in the 
aggregate not more than $10,000. Institutions shall comply with State or 
local small purchase dollar limits under $10,000. If small purchase 
procedures are used for a procurement under the Program, price or rate 
quotation shall be obtained from an adequate number of qualified 
sources; or
    (2) In competitive sealed bids (formal advertising), sealed bids are 
publicly solicited and a firm-fixed-price contract (lump sum or unit 
price) is awarded to the responsible bidder

[[Page 207]]

whose bid, conforming with all the material terms and conditions of the 
invitation for bids, is lowest in price.
    (i) In order for formal advertising to be feasible, appropriate 
conditions must be present, including as a minimum, the following:
    (A) A complete, adequate and realistic specification or purchase 
description is available.
    (B) Two or more responsible suppliers are willing and able to 
compete effectively for the institution's business.
    (C) The procurement lends itself to a firm-fixed price contract, and 
selection of the successful bidder can appropriately be made principally 
on the basis of price.
    (ii) If formal advertising is used for a procurement under the 
Program, the following requirements shall apply:
    (A) A sufficient time prior to the date set for opening of bids, 
bids shall be solicited from an adequate number of known suppliers. In 
addition, the invitation shall be publicly advertised.
    (B) The invitation for bids, including specifications and pertinent 
attachments, shall clearly define the items or services needed in order 
for the bidders to properly respond to the invitation.
    (C) All bids shall be opened publicly at the time and place stated 
in the invitation for bids.
    (D) A firm-fixed-price contract award shall be made by written 
notice to that responsible bidder whose bid, conforming to the 
invitation for bids, is lowest. Where specified in the bidding 
documents, factors such as discounts, transportation costs and life 
cycle costs shall be considered in determining which bid is lowest. 
Payment discounts may only be used to determine low bid when prior 
experience of the grantee indicates that such discounts are generally 
taken.
    (E) Any or all bids may be rejected when there are sound documented 
business reasons in the best interest of the Program.
    (3) In competitive negotiation, proposals are requested from a 
number of sources and the Request for Proposal is publicized. 
Negotiations are normally conducted with more than one of the sources 
submitting offers, and either a fixed-price or cost-reimbursable type 
contract is awarded, as appropriate. Competitive negotiation may be used 
if conditions are not appropriate for the use of formal advertising. If 
competitive negotiation is used for a procurement under a grant, the 
following requirements shall apply:
    (i) Proposals shall be solicited from an adequate number of 
qualified sources to permit reasonable competition consistent with the 
nature and requirements of the procurement. The Request for Proposals 
shall be publicized and reasonable requests by other sources to compete 
shall be honored to the maximum extent practicable:
    (ii) The Request for Proposal shall identify all significant 
evaluation factors, including price or cost where required and their 
relative importance;
    (iii) The institution shall provide mechanisms for technical 
evaluation of the proposal received, determinations of responsible 
offerors for the purpose of written or oral discussions, and selection 
for contract award; and
    (iv) Award may be made to the responsible offeror whose proposal 
will be most advantageous to the procuring party, price and other 
factors considered. Unsuccessful offerors should be notified promptly.
    (4) Noncompetitive negotiation is procurement through solicitation 
of a proposal from only one source, or after solicitation of a number of 
sources, competition is determined inadequate. Noncompetitive 
negotiation may be used when the award of a contract is infeasible under 
small purchase, competitive bidding (formal advertising), or competitive 
negotiation procedures. Circumstances under which a contract may be 
awarded by noncompetitive negotiation are limited to the following:
    (i) The item is available only from a single source;
    (ii) Public exigency or emergency when the urgency for the 
requirement will not permit a delay incident to competitive 
solicitation;
    (iii) FCS authorizes noncompetitive negotiation; or
    (iv) After solicitation of a number of sources, competition is 
determined inadequate.
    (j) The cost plus a percentage of cost method of contracting shall 
not be used. Instructions shall perform some

[[Page 208]]

form of cost or price analysis in connection with every procurement 
action including contract modifications. Costs or prices based on 
estimated costs for contracts under the Program shall be allowed only to 
the extent that costs incurred or cost estimates included in negotiated 
prices are consistent with Federal cost principles.
    (k) Institutions shall maintain records sufficient to detail the 
significant history of a procurement. These records shall include, but 
are not necessarily limited to information pertinent to the following: 
rationale for the method of procurement, selection of contract type, 
contractor selection or rejection, and the basis for the cost or price.
    (l) In addition to provisions defining a sound and complete 
procurement contract, institutions shall include the following contract 
provisions or conditions in all procurement contracts and subcontracts 
as required by the provision, Federal Law or FCS:
    (1) Contracts other than small purchases shall contain provisions or 
conditions which will allow for administrative, contractual, or legal 
remedies in instances where contractors violate or breach contract 
terms, and provide for such sanctions and penalties as may be 
appropriate;
    (2) All contracts in excess of $10,000 shall contain suitable 
provisions for termination by the institution including the manner by 
which it will be effected and the basis for settlement. In addition, 
such contracts shall describe conditions under which the contract may be 
terminated for default as well as conditions where the contract may be 
terminated because of circumstances beyond the control of the 
contractor;
    (3) All contracts awarded in excess of $10,000 by institutions and 
their contractors shall contain a provision requiring compliance with 
Executive Order 11246, entitled ``Equal Employment Opportunity,'' as 
amended by Executive Order 11375, and as supplemented in Department of 
Labor regulations (41 CFR part 60);
    (4) Where applicable, all contracts awarded by institutions in 
excess of $2,500 which involve the employment of mechanics or laborers 
shall include a provision for compliance with section 103 of the 
Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act (40 U.S.C. 327 through 330) 
as supplemented by Department of Labor regulations (29 CFR part 5). 
Under section 103 of the Act, each contractor shall be required to 
compute the wages of every mechanic and laborer on the basis of a 
standard work day of 8 hours and a standard work week of 40 hours. Work 
in excess of the standard work day or week is permissible provided that 
the worker is compensated at a rate of not less than 1\1/2\ times the 
basic rate of pay for all hours worked in excess of 8 hours in any 
calendar day or 40 hours in the work week. These requirements do not 
apply to the purchases of supplies or materials or articles ordinarily 
available on the open market, or contracts for transportation or 
transmission of intelligence;
    (5) The contract shall include notice of USDA requirements and 
regulations pertaining to reporting and patent rights under any contract 
involving research, developmental, experimental or demonstration work 
with respect to any discovery or invention which arises or is developed 
in the course of or under such contract, and of USDA requirements and 
regulations pertaining to copyrights and rights in data. These 
requirements are in Sec. 3015.175 of the USDA Uniform Federal Assistance 
Regulations 7 CFR part 3015. All negotiated contracts (except those 
awarded by small purchases procedures) awarded by institutions shall 
include a provision to the effect that the institution, FCS, the 
Comptroller General of the United States or any of their duly authorized 
representatives, shall have access to any books, documents, papers, and 
records of the contractor which are directly pertinent to that specific 
contract, for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts, and 
transcriptions. Institutions shall require contractors to maintain all 
required records for three years after institutions make final payment 
and all other pending matters are closed;

[[Page 209]]

    (6) Contracts and subcontracts of amounts in excess of $100,000 
shall contain a provision which requires compliance with all applicable 
standards, orders, or requirements issued under section 306 of the Clean 
Air Act (42 U.S.C. 1837(h)), section 508 of the Clean Water Act (33 
U.S.C. 1368), Executive Order 11738, and Environmental Protection Agency 
regulations (40 CFR part 15), which prohibit the use under nonexempt 
Federal contracts, grants or loans of facilities included on the EPA 
List of Violating Facilities. The provision shall require reporting of 
violations to FCS and to the U.S. EPA Assistant Administrator for 
Enforcement (EN-329); and
    (7) Contracts shall recognize mandatory standards and policies 
relating to energy efficiency which are contained in the State energy 
efficiency conservation plan issued in compliance with the Energy Policy 
and Conservation Act (Pub. L. 94-163).
    (m) Institutions shall maintain a contract administration system 
insuring that contractors perform in accordance with the terms, 
conditions, and specifications of their contracts or purchase orders.


<R05>
Sec. 226.23  Free and reduced-price meals.

    (a) The State agency shall require each institution to submit, at 
the time the institution applies for Program participation, a written 
policy statement concerning free and reduced-price meals to be used 
uniformly in all child care and adult day care facilities under its 
jurisdiction as required in this section. Institutions shall not be 
approved for participation nor agreements renewed unless the free and 
reduced-price policy statement has been approved. Pending approval of a 
revision of a policy statement, the existing policy shall remain in 
effect.
    (b) Sponsoring organizations of day care homes (which may not serve 
meals at a separate charge to children) and other institutions which 
elect to serve meals at no separate charge, shall develop a policy 
statement consisting of an assurance to the State agency that all 
participants are served the same meals at no separate charge, regardless 
of race, color, national origin, sex, age, or handicap and that there is 
no discrimination in the course of the food service.
    (c) Independent centers and sponsoring organizations of centers 
which charge separately for meals shall develop a policy statement for 
determining eligibility for free and reduced-price meals which shall 
include the following:
    (1) The specific criteria to be used in determining eligibility for 
free and reduced-price meals. The institution's standards of eligibility 
shall conform to the Secretary's income standards;
    (2) A description of the method or methods to be used in accepting 
applications from families for free and reduced-price meals. Such 
methods will ensure that applications are accepted from households on 
behalf of children who are members of AFDC assistance units or food 
stamp households or, for adult participants, who are members of a food 
stamp household or SSI or Medicaid participants;
    (3) A description of the method or methods to be used to collect 
payments from those participants paying the full or reduced price of the 
meal which will protect the anonymity of the participants receiving a 
free or reduced-price meal;
    (4) An assurance which provides that the institution will establish 
a hearing procedure for use when benefits are denied or terminated as a 
result of verification:
    (i) A simple, publicly announced method for a family to make an oral 
or written request for a hearing;
    (ii) An opportunity for the family to be assisted or represented by 
an attorney or other person in presenting its appeal;
    (iii) An opportunity to examine, prior to and during the hearing, 
the documents and records presented to support the decision under 
appeal;
    (iv) That the hearing shall be held with reasonable promptness and 
convenience to the family and that adequate notice shall be given to the 
family as to the time and place of the hearing;
    (v) An opportunity for the family to present oral or documentary 
evidence and arguments supporting its position;
    (vi) An opportunity for the family to question or refute any 
testimony or

[[Page 210]]

other evidence and to confront and cross-examine any adverse witnesses;
    (vii) That the hearing shall be conducted and the determination made 
by a hearing official who did not participate in making the initial 
decision;
    (viii) The determination of the hearing official shall be based on 
the oral and documentary evidence presented at the hearing and made a 
part of that hearing record;
    (ix) That the family and any designated representatives shall be 
notified in writing of the decision of the hearing official;
    (x) That a written record shall be prepared with respect to each 
hearing, which shall include the decision under appeal, any documentary 
evidence and a summary of any oral testimony presented at the hearing, 
the decision of the hearing official, including the reasons therefor, 
and a copy of the notification to the family of the decision of the 
hearing official; and
    (xi) That such written record of each hearing shall be preserved for 
a period of three years and shall be available for examination by the 
family or its representatives at any reasonable time and place during 
such period;
    (5) An assurance that there will be no overt identification of free 
and reduced-price meal recipients and no discrimination against any 
participant on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, age, or 
handicap;
    (6) An assurance that the charges for a reduced-price lunch or 
supper will not exceed 40 cents, that the charge for a reduced-price 
breakfast will not exceed 30 cents, and that the charge for a reduced-
price supplement will not exceed 15 cents.
    (d) Each institution shall annually provide the information media 
serving the area from which the institution draws its attendance with a 
public release. All media releases issued by institutions other than 
sponsoring organizations of day care homes, shall include the 
Secretary's Income Eligibility Guidelines for Free and Reduced-Price 
Meals. The release issued by all sponsoring organizations of day care 
homes, and by other institutions which elect not to charge separately 
for meals, shall announce the availability of meals at no separate 
charge. The release issued by child care institutions which charge 
separately for meals shall announce the availability of free and 
reduced-price meals to children meeting the approved eligibility 
criteria. The release issued by child care institutions shall also 
announce that children who are members of AFDC assistance units or food 
stamp households are automatically eligible to receive free meal 
benefits. The release issued by adult day care centers which charge 
separately for meals shall announce the availability of free and 
reduced-price meals to participants meeting the approved eligibility 
criteria. The release issued by adult day care centers shall also 
announce that adult participants who are members of food stamp 
households or who are SSI or Medicaid participants are automatically 
eligible to receive free meal benefits. All releases shall state that 
meals are available to all participants without regard to race, color, 
national origin, sex, age or handicap.
    (e)(1) Application for free and reduced-price meals. (i) For the 
purpose of determining eligibility for free and reduced-price meals, 
institutions other than sponsoring organizations of day care homes shall 
distribute applications for free and reduced-price meals to the families 
of participants enrolled in the institution. Sponsoring organizations of 
day care homes shall distribute applications for free and reduced-price 
meals to day care home providers who wish to enroll their eligible 
children in the Program. The application, and any other descriptive 
material distributed to such persons, shall contain only the family-size 
income levels for reduced-price meal eligibility with an explanation 
that households with incomes less than or equal to these levels are 
eligible for free or reduced-price meals. Such forms and descriptive 
materials may not contain the income standards for free meals. However, 
such forms and materials distributed by child care institutions shall 
state that, if a child is a member of a food stamp household or AFDC 
assistance unit, the child is automatically eligible to receive free 
Program meal benefits, subject to the completion of the application as 
described in Sec. 226.23(e)(1)(ii) of this part; such forms and 
materials distributed

[[Page 211]]

by adult day care centers shall state that, if an adult participant is a 
member of a food stamp household or is a SSI or Medicaid participant, 
the adult participant is automatically eligible to receive free Program 
meal benefits, subject to completion of the application as described in 
Sec. 226.23(e)(1)(iii) of this part.
    (ii) Except as provided in paragraph (e)(1)(iv) of this section, the 
application for children shall contain a request for the following 
information:
    (A) The names of all children for whom application is made;
    (B) The names of all other household members;
    (C) The social security number of the adult household member who 
signs the application, or an indication that he/she does not possess a 
social security number;
    (D) The income received by each household member identified by 
source of income (such as earnings, wages, welfare, pensions, support 
payments, unemployment compensation, social security, and other cash 
income received or withdrawn from any other source, including savings, 
investments, trust accounts, and other resources);
    (E) A statement to the effect that ``In certain cases, foster 
children are eligible for free and reduced-price meals regardless of 
household income. If such children are living with you and you wish to 
apply for such meals, please contact us.'';
    (F) A statement which includes substantially the following 
information: ``Section 9 of the National School Lunch Act requires that, 
unless a food stamp or AFDC case number is provided for your child, you 
must include a social security number on the application. This must be 
the social security number of the adult household member signing the 
application. If the adult household member signing the application does 
not possess a social security number, he/she must indicate so on the 
application. Provision of a social security number is not mandatory, but 
if a social security number is not provided or an indication is not made 
that the adult household member signing the application does not have 
one, the application cannot be approved. This notice must be brought to 
the attention of the household member whose social security number is 
disclosed. The social security number may be used to identify the 
household member in carrying out efforts to verify the correctness of 
information stated on the application. These verification efforts may be 
carried out through progam reviews, audits, and investigations and may 
include contacting employers to determine income, contacting a food 
stamp or welfare office to determine current certification for receipt 
of food stamps or AFDC benefits, contacting the State employment 
security office to determine the amount of benefits received, and 
checking the documentation produced by household members to prove the 
amount of income received. These efforts may result in loss or reduction 
of benefits, administrative claims or legal action if incorrect 
information is reported.'' State agencies and institutions shall ensure 
that the notice complies with section 7 of Pub. L. 93-579. If a State or 
local agency plans to use the social security numbers for Program 
verification purposes in a manner not described by this notice, the 
notice shall be altered to include a description of those uses; and
    (G) The signature of an adult member of the household which appears 
immediately below a statement that the person signing the application 
certifies that all information furnished is true and correct; that the 
application is being made in connection with the receipt of Federal 
funds; that Program officials may verify the information on the 
application; and that the deliberate misrepresentation of any of the 
information on the application may subject the applicant to prosecution 
under applicable State and Federal criminal statutes.
    (iii) Except as provided in paragraph (e)(1)(v) of this section, the 
application for adults shall contain a request for the following 
information:
    (A) The names of all adults for whom application is made;
    (B) The names of all other household members;
    (C) The social security number of the adult household member who 
signs the application, or an indication that he/

[[Page 212]]

she does not possess a social security number;
    (D) The income received by source of income (such as earnings, 
wages, welfare, pensions, support payments, unemployment compensation, 
social security, and other cash income received or withdrawn from any 
other source, including savings, investments, trust accounts and other 
resources);
    (E) A statement which includes substantially the following 
information: ``Section 9 of the National School Lunch Act requires that, 
unless a food stamp case number or SSI or Medicaid assistance 
identification number is provided for the adult for whom benefits are 
sought, you must include a social security number on the application. 
This must be the social security number of the adult household member 
signing the application. If the adult household member signing the 
application does not possess a social security number, he/she must 
indicate so on the application. Provision of a social security number is 
not mandatory, but if a social security number is not provided or an 
indication is not made that the adult household member signing the 
application does not have one, the application cannot be approved. This 
notice must be brought to the attention of the household member whose 
social security number is disclosed. The social security number may be 
used to identify the household member in carrying out efforts to verify 
the correctness of information stated on the application. These 
verification efforts maybe carried out through program review, audits 
and investigations and may include contacting employers to determine 
income, contacting a food stamp or welfare office to determine current 
certification for receipt of food stamps, contacting the issuing office 
of SSI or Medicaid benefits to determine current certification for 
receipt of these benefits, contacting the State employment security 
office to determine the amount of benefits received, and checking the 
documentation produced by household members to provide the amount of 
income received. These efforts may result in loss or reduction of 
benefits, administrative claims or legal action if incorrect information 
is reported.'' State agencies and institutions shall ensure that the 
notice complies with section 7 of Pub. L. 93-579. If a State or local 
agency plans to use the social security numbers for CCFP verification 
purposes in a manner not described by this notice, the notice shall be 
altered to include a description of those uses; and
    (F) The signature of an adult member of the household which appears 
immediately below a statement that the person signing the application 
certifies that all information furnished is true and correct; that the 
application is being made in connection with the receipt of Federal 
funds; that Program officials may verify the information on the 
application; and that the deliberate misrepresentation of any of the 
information on the application may subject the applicant to prosecution 
under applicable State and Federal criminal statutes.
    (iv) If they so desire, households applying on behalf of children 
who are members of food stamp households or AFDC assistance units may 
apply for free meal benefits under this paragraph rather than under the 
procedures described in paragraph (e)(1)(ii) of this section. Households 
applying on behalf of children who are members of food stamp households 
or AFDC assistance units shall be required to provide: (A) The names and 
food stamp or AFDC case numbers of the child(ren) for whom automatic 
free meal eligibility is claimed; and (B) the signature of an adult 
member of the household as provided for in Sec. 226.23(e)(1)(ii)(G). In 
accordance with Sec. 226.23(e)(1)(ii)(F), if a food stamp or AFDC case 
number is provided, it may be used to verify the current food stamp or 
AFDC certification for the child(ren) for whom free meal benefits are 
being claimed. Whenever households apply for benefits for children not 
receiving food stamp or AFDC benefits, they must apply in accordance 
with the requirements set forth in Sec. 226.23(e)(1)(ii).
    (v) If they so desire, households applying on behalf of adults who 
are members of food stamp households or SSI or Medicaid participants may 
apply for free meal benefits under this paragraph rather than under the 
procedures described in paragraph (e)(1)(iii) of this section. 
Households applying on

[[Page 213]]

behalf of adults who are members of food stamp households or SSI or 
Medicaid participants shall be required to provide:
    (A) The names and food stamp case numbers or SSI or Medicaid 
assistance identification numbers of the adults for whom automatic free 
meal eligibility is claimed; and
    (B) The signature of an adult member of the household as provided in 
Sec. 226.23(e)(1)(iii)(F).

In accordance with Sec. 226.23(e)(1)(iii)(G), if a food stamp case 
number or SSI or Medicaid assistance identification number is provided 
it may be used to verify the current food stamp or SSI or Medicaid 
certification for the adult(s) for whom free meal benefits are being 
claimed. Whenever households apply for benefits for adults not receiving 
food stamps or SSI or Medicaid benefits, they must apply in accordance 
with the requirements set forth in Sec. 226.23(e)(1)(iii).
    (2) Letter to households. Institutions shall distribute a letter to 
households or guardians of enrolled participants in order to inform them 
of the procedures regarding eligibility for free and reduced-price 
meals. The letter shall accompany the application required under 
paragraph (e)(1) of this section and shall contain:
    (i) The income standards for reduced-price meals, with an 
explanation that households with incomes less than or equal to the 
reduced-price standards would be eligible for free or reduced-price 
meals (the income standards for free meals shall not be included in 
letters or notices to such applicants);
    (ii) How a participant's household may make application for free or 
reduced-price meals;
    (iii) An explanation that an application for free or reduced price 
benefits cannot be approved unless it contains complete 
``documentation'' as defined in Sec. 226.2.
    (iv) The statement: ``In the operation of child feeding programs, no 
person will be discriminated against because of race, color, national 
origin, sex, age, or handicap'';
    (v) A statement to the effect that participants having family 
members who become unemployed are eligible for free or reduced-price 
meals during the period of unemployment, provided that the loss of 
income causes the family income during the period of unemployment to be 
within the eligibility standards for those meals;
    (vi) Except in the case of adult participants, a statement to the 
effect that in certain cases foster children are eligible for free or 
reduced-price meals regardless of the income of such household with whom 
they reside and that households wishing to apply for such benefits for 
foster children should contact the institution; and
    (vii) An explanation that households receiving free and reduced-
price meals must notify appropriate institution officials during the 
year of any decreases in household size or increases in income of over 
$50 per month or $600 per year or--
    (A) In the case of households of enrolled children that provide a 
food stamp or AFDC case number to establish a child's eligibility for 
free meals, any termination in the child's certification to participate 
in the Food Stamp or AFDC Programs, or
    (B) In the case of households of adult participants that provide a 
food stamp case number or an SSI or Medicaid assistance identification 
number to establish an adult's eligibility for free meals, any 
termination in the adult's certification to participate in the Food 
Stamp, SSI or Medicaid Programs.
    (3) In addition to the information listed in paragraph (e)(2) of 
this section pricing institutions must include in their letter to 
household an explanation that indicates that: (i) The information in the 
application may be verified at any time during the year; and (ii) how a 
family may appeal a decision of the institution to deny, reduce, or 
terminate benefits as described under the hearing procedure set forth in 
paragraph (c)(4) of this section.
    (4) Determination of eligibility. The institution shall take the 
income information provided by the household on the application and 
calculate the household's total current income. When a completed 
application furnished by a family indicates that the family meets the 
eligibility criteria for free or reduced-price meals, the participants 
from that family shall be determined eligible for free or reduced-

[[Page 214]]

price meals. Institutions that are pricing programs shall promptly 
provide written notice to each family informing them of the results of 
the eligibility determinations. When the information furnished by the 
family is not complete or does not meet the eligibility criteria for 
free or reduced-price meals, institution officials must consider the 
participants from that family as not eligible for free or reduced-price 
meals, and must consider the participants as eligible for ``paid'' 
meals. When information furnished by the family of participants enrolled 
in a pricing program does not meet the eligibility criteria for free or 
reduced-price meals, pricing program officials shall provide written 
notice to each family denied free or reduced-price benefits. At a 
minimum, this notice shall include:
    (i) The reason for the denial of benefits, e.g., income in excess of 
allowable limits or incomplete application;
    (ii) Notification of the right to appeal;
    (iii) Instructions on how to appeal; and
    (iv) a statement reminding the household that they may reapply for 
free or reduced-price benefits at any time during the year,
The reasons for ineligibility shall be properly documented and retained 
on file at the institution.
    (5) Appeals of denied benefits. A family that wishes to appeal the 
denial of an application in a pricing program shall do so under the 
hearing procedures established under paragraph (c)(4) of this section. 
However, prior to initiating the hearing procedures, the household may 
request a conference to provide all affected parties the opportunity to 
discuss the situation, present information and obtain an explanation of 
the data submitted on the application or the decision rendered. The 
request for a conference shall not in any way prejudice or diminish the 
right to a fair hearing. The institution shall promptly schedule a fair 
hearing, if requested.
    (f) Free, reduced-price and paid meal eligibility figures must be 
reported by institutions to State agencies at least once each year and 
shall be based on current family-size and income information of enrolled 
participants. Such information shall be no more than 12 months old.
    (g) Sponsoring organizations for family day care homes shall ensure 
that no separate charge for food service is imposed on families of 
children enrolled in participating family day care homes.
    (h) Verification of eligibility. State agencies shall conduct 
verification of eligibility for free and reduced-price meals on an 
annual basis, in accordance with the verification procedures outlined in 
paragraphs (h) (1) and (2) of this section. Verification may be 
conducted in accordance with Program assistance requirements of 
Sec. 226.6(l); however, the performance of verification for individual 
institutions shall occur no less frequently than once every four years. 
Any State may, with the written approval of FCSRO, use alternative 
approaches in the conduct of verification, provided that the results 
achieved meet the requirements of this part. If the verification process 
discloses deficiencies with the determination of eligibility and/or 
application procedures which exceed maximum levels established by FCS, 
State agencies shall conduct follow-up reviews for the purpose of 
determining that corrective action has been taken by the institution. 
These reviews shall be conducted within one year of the date the 
verification process was completed. The verification effort shall be 
applied without regard to race, color, national origin, sex, age, or 
handicap. State agencies shall maintain on file for review a description 
of the annual verification to be accomplished in order to demonstrate 
compliance with paragraphs (h) (1) and (2) of this section.
    (1) Verification procedures for nonpricing programs. State agency 
verification procedures for nonpricing programs shall consist of a 
review of all approved free and reduced-price applications on file to 
ensure that: (i) The application has been correctly and completely 
executed by the household; (ii) the institution has correctly determined 
and classified the eligibility of enrolled participants for free or 
reduced-price meals based on the information included on the application 
submitted by the household; (iii) the institution has accurately 
reported to the State agency

[[Page 215]]

the number of enrolled participants meeting the criteria for free or 
reduced-price meal eligibility and the number of enrolled participants 
that do not meet the eligibility criteria for those meals; and (iv) in 
addition, the State agency may conduct further verification of the 
information provided by the household on the approved application for 
program meal eligibility. If this effort is undertaken, the State agency 
shall conduct this further verification for nonpricing programs in 
accordance with the procedures described in paragraph (h)(2) of this 
section.
    (2) Verification procedures for pricing programs. (i) For pricing 
programs, in addition to the verification procedures described in 
paragraph (h)(1) of this section, State agencies shall also conduct 
verification of the income information provided on the approved 
application for free and reduced price meals and, at State agency 
discretion, verification may also include confirmation of other 
information required on the application. However, (A) if a food stamp or 
AFDC case number is provided for a child, verification for such child 
shall include only confirmation that the child is included in a 
currently certified food stamp household or AFDC assistance unit; or (B) 
if a food stamp case number or SSI or Medicaid assistance identification 
number is provided for an adult, verification for such adult shall 
include only confirmation that the adult is included in a currenty 
certified food stamp household or is currently certified to receive SSI 
or Medicaid benefits.
    (ii) State agencies shall perform verification on a random sample of 
no less than 3 percent of the approved free and reduced price 
applications in an institution which is a pricing program.
    (iii) Households shall be informed in writing that they have been 
selected for verification and they are required to submit the requested 
verification information to confirm their eligibility for free or 
reduced-price benefits by such date as determined by the State agency. 
Those households shall be informed of the type or types of information 
and/or documents acceptable to the State agency and the name and phone 
number of an official who can answer questions and assist the household 
in the verification effort. This information must include a social 
security number for each adult household member or an indication that 
he/she does not have one. State agencies shall inform selected 
households that:
    (A) Section 9 of the National School Lunch Act requires that, unless 
households provide the child's food stamp or AFDC case number, or the 
adult participant's food stamp case number or SSI or Medicaid assistance 
identification number, those selected for verification must provide the 
social security number of each adult household member;
    (B) In lieu of providing a social security number, an adult 
household member may indicate that he/she does not possess one;
    (C) Provision of a social security number is not mandatory, but if a 
social security number is not provided for each adult household member 
or an indication is not made that he/she does not possess one, benefits 
will be terminated;
    (D) The social security number may be used to identify household 
members in carrying out efforts to verify the correctness of information 
stated on the application and continued eligibility for the program. 
These verification efforts may be carried out through program reviews, 
audits, and investigations and may include contacting employers to 
determine income, contacting Federal, State or local agencies to 
determine current certification for receipt of food stamps or AFDC, SSI 
or Medicaid benefits, contacting the State employment security office to 
determine the amount of benefits received, and checking the 
documentation produced by household members to prove the amount of 
income received. These efforts may result in loss or reduction of 
benefits, administrative claims or legal actions if incorrect 
information was reported; and
    (E) This information must be provided to the attention of each adult 
household member disclosing his/her social security number. State 
agencies shall ensure that the notice complies with section 7 of Pub. L. 
93-579 (Privacy Act of 1974). These households shall be provided with 
the name and

[[Page 216]]

phone number of an official who can assist in the verification effort.
    (iv) Households of enrolled children selected for verification shall 
also be informed that if they are currently certified to participate in 
the Food Stamp or AFDC Program, they may submit proof of that 
certification in lieu of income information. In those cases, such proof 
shall consist of a current ``Notice of Eligibility'' for Food Stamp or 
AFDC Program benefits or equivalent official documentation issued by a 
food stamp or welfare office which shows that the children are members 
of households or assistance units currently certified to participate in 
the Food Stamp or AFDC Programs. An identification card for either 
program is not acceptable as verification unless it contain an 
expiration date. Households of enrolled adults selected for verification 
shall also be informed that if they are currently certified to 
participate in the Food Stamp Program or SSI or Medicaid Programs, they 
may submit proof of that certification in lieu of income information. In 
those cases, such proof shall consist of (A) a current ``Notice of 
Eligibility'' for Food Stamp benefits or equivalent official 
documentation issued by a food stamp or welfare office which shows that 
the adult participant is a member of a household currently certified to 
participate in the Food Stamp Program. An identification card is not 
acceptable as verification unless it contains an expiration date; or (B) 
official documentation issued by an appropriate SSI or Medicaid office 
which shows that the adult participant currently receives SSI or 
Medicaid assistance. An identification care is not acceptable as 
verification unless it contains an expiration date. All households 
selected for verification shall be advised that failure to cooperate 
with verification efforts will result in a termination of benefits.
    (v) Sources of information for verification may include written 
evidence, collateral contacts, and/or systems of records.
    (A) Written evidence shall be used as the primary source of 
information for verification. Written evidence includes written 
confirmation of a household's circumstances, such as wage stubs, award 
letters, letters from employers, and, for enrolled children, current 
certification to participate in the Food Stamp or AFDC Programs, or, for 
adult participants, current certification to participate in the Food 
Stamp, SSI or Medicaid Programs. Whenever written evidence is 
insufficient to confirm eligibility, the State agency may use collateral 
contacts.
    (B) Collateral contact is a verbal confirmation of a household's 
circumstances by a person outside of the household. The collateral 
contact may be made in person or by phone and shall be authorized by the 
household. The verifying official may select a collateral contact if the 
household fails to designate one or designates one which is unacceptable 
to the verifying official. If the verifying official designates a 
collateral contact, the contact shall not be made without providing 
written or oral notice to the household. At the time of this notice, the 
household shall be informed that it may consent to the contact or 
provide acceptable verification in another form. The household shall be 
informed that its eligibility for free or reduced price meals shall be 
terminated if it refuses to choose one of these options. Termination 
shall be made in accordance with paragraph (h)(2)(vii) of this section. 
Collateral contacts could include employers, social service agencies, 
and migrant agencies.
    (C) Systems of records to which the State agency may have routine 
access are not considered collateral contacts. Information concerning 
income, family size, or food stamp/AFDC certification for enrolled 
children, or food stamp/SSI/Medicaid certification for enrolled adults, 
which is maintained by other government agencies and to which a State 
agency can legally gain access may be used to confirm a household's 
eligibility for Program meal benefits. One possible source could be wage 
and benefit information maintained by the State unemployment agency, if 
that information is available. The use of any information derived from 
other agencies must be used with applicable safeguards concerning 
disclosure.
    (vi) Verification by State agencies of receipt of food stamps, AFDC, 
SSI or Medicaid benefits shall be limited to a

[[Page 217]]

review to determine that the period of eligibility is current. If the 
benefit period is found to have expired, or if the household's 
certification has been terminated, the household shall be required to 
document their income eligibility.
    (vii) The State agency may work with the institution to verify the 
documentation submitted by the household on the application; however, 
the responsibility to complete the verification process may not be 
delegated to the institution.
    (viii) If a household refuses to cooperate with efforts to verify, 
or the verification of income indicates that the household is ineligible 
to receive benefits or is eligible to receive reduced benefits, the 
State agency shall require the pricing program institution to terminate 
or adjust eligibility in accordance with the following procedures. 
Institution officials shall immediately notify families of the denial of 
benefits in accordance with paragraphs (e)(4) and (e)(5) of this 
section. Advance notification shall be provided to families which 
receive a reduction or termination of benefits 10 calendar days prior to 
the actual reduction or termination. The 10-day period shall begin the 
day the notice is transmitted to the family. The notice shall advise the 
household of: (A) The change; (B) the reasons for the change; (C) 
notification of the right to appeal the action and the date by which the 
appeal must be requested in order to avoid a reduction or termination of 
benefits; (D) instructions on how to appeal; and (E) the right to 
reapply at any time during the year. The reasons for ineligibility shall 
be properly documented and retained on file at the institution.
    (ix) When a household disagrees with an adverse action which affects 
its benefits and requests a fair hearing, benefits shall be continued as 
follows while the household awaits the hearing:
    (A) Households which have been approved for benefits and which are 
subject to a reduction or termination of benefits later in the same year 
shall receive continued benefits if they appeal the adverse action 
within the 10-day advance notice period; and
    (B) Households which are denied benefits upon application shall not 
received benefits.
    (3) State agencies shall inform institution officials of the results 
of the verification effort and the action which will be taken in 
response to the verification findings. This notification shall be made 
in accordance with the procedures outlined in Sec. 226.14(a).
    (4) If the verification results disclose that an institution has 
inaccurately classified or reported the number of participants eligible 
for free, reduced-price or paid meals, the State agency shall adjust 
institution rates of reimbursement retroactive to the month in which the 
incorrect eligibility figures were reported by the institution to the 
State agency.
    (5) If the verification results disclose that a household has not 
reported accurate documentation on the application which would support 
continued eligibility for free or reduced-price meals, the State agency 
shall immediately adjust institution rates of reimbursement. However, 
this rate adjustment shall not become effective until the affected 
households have been notified in accordance with the procedures of 
paragraph (h)(2)(vi) of this section and any ensuing appeals have been 
heard as specified in paragraph (h)(2)(viii) of this section.

[47 FR 36527, Aug. 20, 1982, as amended at 49 FR 14078, Apr. 10, 1984; 
50 FR 19310, May 8, 1985; 50 FR 20197, May 15, 1985; 52 FR 36907, Oct. 
2, 1987; 53 FR 52594, Dec. 28, 1988; Amdt. 22, 55 FR 1378, Jan. 14, 
1990; 61 FR 25555, May 22, 1996]


<R04>
              Subpart F--Food Service Equipment Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 226.24  Property management requirements.

    Institutions and administering agencies shall follow the policies 
and procedures governing title, use, and disposition of equipment 
obtained by purchase, whose cost was acquired in whole or part with food 
service equipment assistance funds in accordance with the Department's 
Uniform Federal Assistance Regulations (7 CFR part 3015).

[48 FR 41142, Sept. 14, 1983]

[[Page 218]]


<R04>
                       Subpart G--Other Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 226.25  Other provisions.

    (a) Grant closeout procedures. Grant closeout procedures for the 
Program shall be in accordance with the Uniform Federal Assistance 
Regulations.
    (b) State requirements. Nothing contained in this part shall prevent 
a State agency from imposing additional requirements for participation 
in the Program which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this 
part; however, any additional requirements shall be approved by FCSRO 
and may not deny the Program to an eligible institution.
    (c) Value of assistance. The value of assistance to participants 
under the Program shall not be considered to be income or resources for 
any purposes under any Federal or State laws, including, but not limited 
to laws relating to taxation, welfare, and public assistance programs.
    (d) Maintenance of effort. Expenditure of funds from State and local 
sources for the maintenance of food programs for children shall not be 
diminished as a result of funds received under the Act.
    (e) Fraud penalty. Whoever embezzles, willfully misapplies, steals, 
or obtains by fraud any funds, assets, or property that are the subject 
of a grant or other form of assistance under this part, whether received 
directly or indirectly from the Department or whoever receives, 
conceals, or retains such funds, assets, or property to his use or gain, 
knowing such funds, assets, or property have been embezzled, willfully 
misapplied, stolen, or obtained by fraud shall, if such funds, assets, 
or property are of the value of $100 or more, be fined not more than 
$10,000 or imprisoned not more than five years, or both, or, if such 
funds, assets, or property are of value of less than $100, shall be 
fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned for not more than one year, or 
both.
    (f) Claims adjustment authority. The Secretary shall have the 
authority to determine the amount of, to settle, and to adjust any claim 
arising under the Program, and to compromise or deny such claim or any 
part thereof. The Secretary shall also have the authority to waive such 
claims if the Secretary determines that to do so would serve the 
purposes of the program. This provision shall not diminish the authority 
of the Attorney General of the United States under section 516 of title 
28, U.S. Code, to conduct litigation on behalf of the United States.
    (g) Special retroactivity provisions. Notwithstanding any other 
provisions contained in this part, the following shall apply:
    (1) State agencies shall provide reimbursement for meals served by 
any adult day care center between October 1, 1987 and the date of the 
initial Program agreement between the State agency and the center under 
the following conditions, provided that:
    (i) The center can document that, for any meals claimed:
    (A) Meals served met all requirements including items and quantities 
served;
    (B) Free and reduced-price applications were on file if 
reimbursement for free or reduced-price meals is sought;
    (C) Meal counts by category (free, reduced-price and paid) and type 
served (breakfast, lunch, supper and supplement) are available;
    (D) Appropriate food service revenue and expenditure records are 
available;
    (E) Reimbursement has not been received under title III of the Older 
Americans Act for the claimed meals and CCFP reimbursement does not 
duplicate other funding for the claimed meals; and
    (ii) The application for Program participation is postmarked or 
submitted to the State agency no later than April 17, 1989, and the 
claims for reimbursement for the meals served between October 1, 1987 
and the date of the initial agreement between the State agency and the 
center are postmarked or submitted to the State agency no later than 
April 17, 1989 or the date set by Sec. 226.10(e), whichever is later.
    (2) Alternative documentation for free meal eligibility for adult 
participants shall be based on the following:
    (i) Beginning with October 1, 1987, documentation of membership in a 
food stamp household;
    (ii) For the period October 1, 1987 through September 30, 1988, 
documentation of membership in an AFDC assistance unit; and

[[Page 219]]

    (iii) Beginning October 1, 1988, documentation of receipt of 
assistance under Medicaid or SSI.
    (3) For the period October 1, 1987 through September 30, 1988, the 
family of an adult participant applying for free or reduced-price meals 
shall include a group of related or nonrelated individuals, who are not 
residents of an institution or boarding house, but who are living as one 
economic unit. However, beginning October 1, 1988, the family of an 
adult participant applying for free or reduced-price meals shall include 
only the adult participant and any spouse or dependent(s) residing with 
the adult participant.

[47 FR 36527, Aug. 20, 1982, as amended at 53 FR 52597, Dec. 28, 1988; 
54 FR 13049, Mar. 30, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 226.26  Program information.

    Persons desiring information concerning the Program may write to the 
appropriate State agency or Regional Office of FCS as indicated below:
    (a) In the States of Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New 
Hampshire, New York, Rhode Island, and Vermont: Northeast Regional 
Office, FCS, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 10 Causeway Street, Room 
501, Boston, MA 02222-1065.
    (b) In the States of Delaware, District of Columbia, Maryland, New 
Jersey, Pennsylvania, Puerto Rico, Virginia, Virgin Islands, and West 
Virginia: Mid-Atlantic Regional Office, FCS, U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Mercer Corporate Park, Corporate Boulevard, CN 02150, 
Trenton, NJ 08650.
    (c) In the States of Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, 
Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Tennessee: Southeast 
Regional Office, FCS, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 1100 Spring 
Street, N.W., Atlanta, GA 30367.
    (d) In the States of Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Ohio 
and Wisconsin: Midwest Regional Office, FCS, U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, 50 E. Washington Street, Chicago, IL 60602.
    (e) In the States of Colorado, Iowa, Kansas, Missouri, Montana, 
Nebraska, North Dakota, South Dakota, Utah and Wyoming: Mountain Plains 
Regional Office, FCS, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 1244 Speer 
Boulevard, Suite 903, Denver, CO 80204.
    (f) In the States of Arkansas, Louisiana, New Mexico, Oklahoma and 
Texas: Southwest Regional Office, FCS, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
1100 Commerce Street, Room 5-C-30, Dallas, TX 75242.
    (g) In the States of Alaska, American Samoa, Arizona, California, 
Guam, Hawaii, Idaho, Nevada, Oregon, Trust Territory of the Pacific 
Islands, the Northern Mariana Islands, and Washington: Western Regional 
Office, FCS, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 550 Kearny Street, Room 
400, San Francisco, CA 94108.

[47 FR 36527, Aug. 20, 1982; 47 FR 46072, Oct. 15, 1982, as amended at 
48 FR 40197, Sept. 6, 1983; 53 FR 52598, Dec. 28, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 226.27  Information collection/recordkeeping--OMB assigned control numbers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Current OMB
       7 CFR section where requirements are described          control  
                                                                number  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
226.3-226.4................................................    0584-0055
226.6-226.10...............................................    0584-0055
226.14-226.16..............................................    0584-0055
226.23-226.24..............................................    0584-0055
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[50 FR 53258, Dec. 31, 1985]

            Appendix A to Part 226--Alternate Foods for Meals

                       vegetable protein products

    1. Schools, institutions, and service institutions may use a 
vegetable protein product, defined in paragraph 2, as a food component 
meeting the meal requirements specified in Sec. 210.10, Sec. 225.10 or 
Sec. 226.21 under the following terms and conditions:
    (a) The vegetable protein product must be prepared in combination 
with raw or cooked meat, poultry or seafood and shall resemble as well 
as substitute, in part, for one of these major protein foods. 
Substitute, refers to a vegetable protein product whose presence in 
another food results in the presence of a smaller amount of meat, 
poultry or seafood than is customarily expected or than appears to be 
present in that food. Examples of items in which a vegetable protein 
product may be used include, but are not limited to, beef patties, beef 
crumbles, pizza topping, meat loaf, meat sauce, taco filling, burritos, 
and tuna salad.
    (b) Vegetable protein products may be used in the dry form 
(nonhydrated), partially hydrated or fully hydrated form in combination 
with meat, poultry or seafood. The moisture

[[Page 220]]

content of the fully hydrated vegetable protein product shall be such 
that the mixture will have a minimum of 18 percent protein by weight or 
equivalent amount for the dry or partially hydrated form (based on the 
level that would be provided if the product were fully hydrated).
    (c) The quantity, by weight, of the fully hydrated vegetable protein 
product must not exceed 30 parts to 70 parts meat, poultry or seafood on 
an uncooked basis. The quantity by weight of the dry or partially 
hydrated vegetable protein product must not exceed a level equivalent to 
the amount (dry weight) used in the fully hydrated product at the 30 
percent level of substitution. The dry or partially hydrated product's 
replacement of meat, poultry or seafood will be based on the level of 
substitution it would provide if it were fully hydrated.
    (d) A vegetable protein product may be used to satisfy the meat/meat 
alternate requirement when combined with meat, poultry or seafood and 
when it meets the other requirements of this section. The combination of 
the vegetable protein product and meat, poultry or seafood may meet all 
or part of the meat/meat alternate requirement specified in Sec. 210.10, 
Sec. 225.10 or Sec. 226.21.
    (e) The contribution vegetable protein products make toward the 
meat/meat alternate requirement specified in Secs. 210.10, 225.10, and 
226.21 shall be determined on the basis of the preparation yield of the 
meat, poultry or seafood with which it is combined. When computing the 
preparation yield of a product containing meat, poultry or seafood and 
vegetable protein product, the vegetable protein product shall be 
evaluated as having the same preparation yield that is applied to the 
meat, poultry or seafood it replaces.
    (f) When vegetable protein products are served in a meal with other 
alternate foods authorized in appendix A, each individual alternate food 
shall be used as specifically directed.
    2. A vegetable protein product to be used to resemble and 
substitute, in part, for meat, poultry or seafood, as specified in 
paragraph 1 must meet the following criteria:
    (a) The vegetable protein product (substitute food) shall contain 
one or more vegetable protein products which are defined as follows:
    (1) Vegetable (plant) protein products are foods which are processed 
so that some portion of the nonprotein constituents of the vegetable is 
removed. These vegetable protein products are safe and suitable edible 
products produced from vegetable (plant) sources including, but not 
limited to, soybeans, peanuts, wheat, and corn.
    (b) The types of vegetable protein products described in paragraph 
2.(a)(1) of this appendix shall include flour, concentrate, and isolate 
as defined below:
    (1) When a product contains less than 65 percent protein by weight 
calculated on a moisture-free basis excluding added flavors, colors, or 
other added substances it is a      flour, the blank is to be filled 
with the name of the source of the protein, e.g., ``soy'' or ``peanut''.
    (2) When a product contains 65 percent or more but less than 90 
percent protein by weight calculated on a moisture-free basis excluding 
added flavors, colors, or other added substances, it is a ``     protein 
concentrate'', the blank to be filled with the name of the source of the 
protein, e.g., ``soy'' or ``peanut''.
    (3) When a product contains 90 percent or more protein by weight 
calculated on a moisture-free basis excluding added flavors, colors or 
other added substances, it is a ``     protein isolate'' or ``     
isolated protein,'' the blank to be filled in with the name of the 
source of the protein, e.g., ``soy'' or ``peanut.''
    (c) Compliance with the moisture and protein provisions of paragraph 
2.(b) (1), (2) and (3) of this appendix shall be determined by the 
appropriate methods described in ``Official Methods of Analysis of the 
Association of Official Analytical Chemists'' (latest edition).
    (d) Vegetable protein products which are used to resemble and 
substitute, in part, for meat, poultry or seafood shall be labeled in 
conformance with applicable sections of Sec. 102.76, tentative final 
regulations published by the Food and Drug Administration in the Federal 
Register of July 14, 1978 (43 FR 30472). Adopted for the purpose of this 
regulation are the following:
    (1) The common or usual names for a vegetable protein product used 
to resemble and substitute, in part, for meat, poultry or seafood shall 
include the term ``vegetable protein product'' and may include the term 
``textured'' or ``texturized'' and/or a term e.g., ``granules,'' when 
such term is appropriate. The term ``plant'' may be used in the name in 
lieu of the term ``vegetable.''
    (2) The vegetable protein products used as ingredients in the 
substitute food shall be listed by source (e.g., soy or peanut) and 
product type (i.e., flour, concentrate, isolate) in the ingredient 
statement of the label. Product type(s) listed shall comply with the 
appropriate definition(s) set forth in paragraph 2.(b) (1), (2) and (3), 
may include a term which accurately describes the physical form of the 
product, e.g., ``granules'' when such term is appropriate.
    (e) Vegetable protein products which are used to resemble and 
substitute, in part, for meat, poultry or seafood shall meet the 
following nutritional specifications adopted from Sec. 102.76 
(f)(1)(ii)(a)(b) tentative final regulations, published by the Food and 
Drug Administration in the Federal Register of July 14, 1978 (43 FR 
30472).

[[Page 221]]

    (1) The biological quality of the protein in the vegetable protein 
product shall be at least 80 percent that of casein, determined by 
performing a Protein Efficiency Ratio (PER) assay or unless FCS grants 
an exception by approving an alternate test.
    (2) The vegetable protein product shall contain at least 18 percent 
protein by weight when hydrated or formulated to be used in combination 
with meat, poultry or seafood. (``When hydrated or formulated'' refers 
to a dry vegetable protein product and the amount of water, fat or oil, 
colors, flavors or any other substances which have been added in order 
to make the resultant mixture resemble that meat, poultry or seafood).
    (3) The vegetable protein product must contain the following levels 
of nutrients per gram of protein:

                                                                        
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Nutrient                              Amount   
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Vitamin A (IU)............................................         13   
Thiamine (milligrams).....................................          0.02
Riboflavin (milligrams)...................................           .01
Niacin (milligrams).......................................           .3 
Pantothenic acid (milligrams).............................           .04
Vitamin B<INF>6 (milligrams)...................................           .02
Vitamin B<INF>12 (micrograms)..................................           .1 
Iron (milligrams).........................................           .15
Magnesium (milligrams)....................................          1.15
Zinc (milligrams).........................................           .5 
Copper (micrograms).......................................         24   
Potassium (milligrams)....................................         17   
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (4) Compliance with the nutrient provisions set forth in paragraph 
2.(e) (1), (2) and (3) of this appendix shall be determined by the 
appropriate methods described in ``Official Methods of Analysis of the 
Association of Official Analytical Chemists'' (latest edition).
    (f) Vegetable protein products to be used in the child nutrition 
programs to resemble and substitute, in part, for meat, poultry or 
seafood that comply with the labeling and nutritional specifications set 
forth in paragraph 2.(d) (1) and (2) and paragraph 2.(e) (1), (2) and 
(3) shall bear a label containing the following statement: ``This 
product meets USDA-FCS requirements for use in meeting a portion of the 
meat/meat alternate requirement of the child nutrition programs.'' This 
statement shall appear on the principal display panel area of the 
package.
    (g) It is recommended that for vegetable protein products to be used 
to resemble and substitute, in part, for meat, poultry or seafood and 
labeled as specified in paragraph 2.(f) of this appendix, manufacturers 
provide information on the percent protein contained in the dry 
vegetable protein product (on an as is basis).
    (h) It is recommended that for a vegetable protein product mix, 
manufacturers provide information on (1) the amount by weight of dry 
vegetable protein product in the package, (2) hydration instructions, 
and (3) instructions on how to combine the mix with meat, poultry or 
seafood. A vegetable protein product mix is defined as a dry product 
containing vegetable protein products that comply with the labeling and 
nutritional specifications set forth in paragraphs 2.(d) (1) and (2) and 
paragraph 2.(e) (1), (2) and (3) along with substantial levels (more 
than 5 percent) of seasonings, bread crumbs, flavorings, etc.
    3. Schools, institutions, and service institutions may use a 
commercially prepared meat, poultry or seafood product combined with 
vegetable protein products to meet all or part of the meat/meat 
alternate requirement specified in Sec. 210.10, Sec. 225.10 or 
Sec. 226.21 if the product bears a label containing the statement: 
``This item contains vegetable protein product(s) which is authorized as 
an alternate food in the child nutrition programs.'' (outlined in 
paragraph 2. of this appendix). This would designate that the vegetable 
protein product used in the formulation of the meat, poultry or seafood 
item complies with the naming and nutritional specifications set forth 
in paragraph 2. of this appendix. The presence of this label does not 
insure the proper level of hydration, ratio of substitution nor the 
contribution that the product makes toward meal pattern requirements for 
the child nutrition programs.

[48 FR 781, Jan. 7, 1983; 48 FR 2115, Jan. 18, 1983]

                   Appendix B to Part 226--[Reserved]

      Appendix C to Part 226--Child Nutrition (CN) Labeling Program

    1. The Child Nutrition (CN) Labeling Program is a voluntary 
technical assistance program administered by the Food and Consumer 
Service (FCS) in conjunction with the Food Safety and Inspection Service 
(FSIS), and Agricultural Marketing Service (AMS) of the U.S. Department 
of Agriculture (USDA), and National Marine Fisheries Service of the U.S. 
Department of Commerce (USDC) for the Child Nutrition Programs. This 
program essentially involves the review of a manufacturer's recipe or 
product formulation to determine the contribution a serving of a 
commercially prepared product makes toward meal pattern requirements and 
a review of the CN label statement to ensure its accuracy. CN labeled 
products must be produced in accordance with all requirements set forth 
in this rule.
    2. Products eligible for CN labels are as follows:
    (a) Commercially prepared food products that contribute 
significantly to the meat/meat alternate component of meal pattern

[[Page 222]]

requirements of 7 CFR 210.10, 225.21, and 226.20 and are served in the 
main dish.
    (b) Juice drinks and juice drink products that contain a minimum of 
50 percent full-strength juice by volume.
    3. For the purpose of this appendix the following definitions apply:
    (a) CN label is a food product label that contains a CN label 
statement and CN logo as defined in paragraph 3 (b) and (c) below.
    (b) The CN logo (as shown below) is a distinct border which is used 
around the edges of a ``CN label statement'' as defined in paragraph 
3(c).
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC17SE91.009

    (c) The CN label statement includes the following:
    (1) The product identification number (assigned by FCS),
    (2) The statement of the product's contribution toward meal pattern 
requirements of 7 CFR 210.10, 220.8, 225.21, and 226.20. The statement 
shall identify the contribution of a specific portion of a meat/meat 
alternate product toward the meat/meat alternate, bread/bread alternate, 
and/or vegetable/fruit component of the meal pattern requirements. For 
juice drinks and juice drink products the statement shall identify their 
contribution toward the vegetable/fruit component of the meal pattern 
requirements,
    (3) Statement specifying that the use of the CN logo and CN 
statement was authorized by FCS, and
    (4) The approval date.
    For example:
    [GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC17SE91.010
    
    (d) Federal inspection means inspection of food products by FSIS, 
AMS or USDC.
    4. Food processors or manufacturers may use the CN label statement 
and CN logo as defined in paragraph 3 (b) and (c) under the following 
terms and conditions:
    (a) The CN label must be reviewed and approved at the national level 
by the Food and Consumer Service and appropriate USDA or USDC Federal 
agency responsible for the inspection of the product.
    (b) The CN labeled product must be produced under Federal inspection 
by USDA or USDC. The Federal inspection must be performed in accordance 
with an approved partial or total quality control program or standards 
established by the appropriate Federal inspection service.
    (c) The CN label statement must be printed as an integral part of 
the product label along with the product name, ingredient listing, the 
inspection shield or mark for the appropriate inspection program, the 
establishment number where appropriate, and the manufacturer's or 
distributor's name and address.
    (1) The inspection marking for CN labeled non-meat, non-poultry, and 
non-seafood products with the exception of juice drinks and juice drink 
products is established as follows:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TC17SE91.011


[[Page 223]]


    (d) Yields for determining the product's contribution toward meal 
pattern requirements must be calculated using the Food Buying Guide for 
Child Nutrition Programs (Program Aid Number 1331).
    5. In the event a company uses the CN logo and CN label statement 
inappropriately, the company will be directed to discontinue the use of 
the logo and statement and the matter will be referred to the 
appropriate agency for action to be taken against the company.
    6. Products that bear a CN label statement as set forth in paragraph 
3(c) carry a warranty. This means that if a food service authority 
participating in the child nutrition programs purchases a CN labeled 
product and uses it in accordance with the manufacturer's directions, 
the school or institution will not have an audit claim filed against it 
for the CN labeled product for noncompliance with the meal pattern 
requirements of 7 CFR 210.10, 220.8, 225.21, and 226.20. If a State or 
Federal auditor finds that a product that is CN labeled does not 
actually meet the meal pattern requirements claimed on the label, the 
auditor will report this finding to FCS. FCS will prepare a report of 
the findings and send it to the appropriate divisions of FSIS and AMS of 
the USDA, National Marine Fisheries Services of the USDC, Food and Drug 
Administration, or the Department of Justice for action against the 
company.
    Any or all of the following courses of action may be taken:
    (a) The company's CN label may be revoked for a specific period of 
time;
    (b) The appropriate agency may pursue a misbranding or mislabeling 
action against the company producing the product;
    (c) The company's name will be circulated to regional FCS offices;
    (d) FCS will require the food service program involved to notify the 
State agency of the labeling violation.
    7. FCS is authorized to issue operational policies, procedures, and 
instructions for the CN Labeling Program.
    To apply for a CN label and to obtain additional information on CN 
label application procedures write to: CN Labels, U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Food and Consumer Service, Nutrition and Technical Services 
Division, 3101 Park Center Drive, Alexandria, Virginia 22302.

[49 FR 18457, May 1, 1984; 49 FR 45109, Nov. 15, 1984]


<R03>
PART 227--NUTRITION EDUCATION AND TRAINING PROGRAM--Table of Contents

<R05>


                           Subpart A--General

Sec.
227.1  General purpose and scope.
227.2  Definitions.
227.3  Administration.
227.4  Application and agreement.
227.5  Program funding.

                   Subpart B--State Agency Provisions

227.30  Responsibilities of State agencies.
227.31  Audits, management reviews, and evaluations.

                 Subpart C--State Coordinator Provisions

227.35  Responsibilities of State coordinator.
227.36  Requirements of needs assessment.
227.37  State plan for nutrition education and training.

                        Subpart D--Miscellaneous

227.40  Program information.
227.41  Recovery of funds.
227.42  Grant closeout procedures.
227.43  Participation of adults.
227.44  Management evaluations and reviews.

Appendix to Part 227--Apportionment of Funds for Nutrition Education and 
          Training

    Authority: Sec. 15, Pub. L. 95-166, 91 Stat. 1340 (42 U.S.C. 1788), 
unless otherwise noted.

    Source: 44 FR 28282, May 15, 1979, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                           Subpart A--General


<R05>
Sec. 227.1  General purpose and scope.

    The purpose of these regulations is to implement section 19 of the 
Child Nutrition Act (added by Pub. L. 95-166, effective November 10, 
1977) which authorizes the Secretary to formulate and carry out a 
nutrition information and education program through a system of grants 
to State agencies to provide for (a) the nutritional training of 
educational and foodservice personnel, (b) the foodservice management 
training of school foodservice personnel, and (c) the conduct of 
nutrition education activities in schools and child care institutions. 
To the maximum extent possible, the Program shall fully utilize the 
child nutrition programs as a learning experience.


<R05>
Sec. 227.2  Definitions.

    (a) Administrative costs means costs allowable under Federal 
Management Circular 74-4, other than program costs, incurred by a State 
agency for overall administrative and supervisory purposes, including, 
but not limited to, costs of financial management, data

[[Page 224]]

processing, recordkeeping and reporting, personnel management, and 
supervising the State Coordinator.
    (b) Child Care Food Program means the program authorized by section 
17 of the National School Lunch Act, as amended.
    (c) Child Nutrition Programs means any or all of the following: 
National School Lunch Program, School Breakfast Program, Child Care Food 
Program.
    (d) Commodity only school means a school which has entered into an 
agreement under Sec. 210.15a(b) of this subchapter to receive 
commodities donated under part 250 of this chapter for a nonprofit lunch 
program.
    (e) Department means the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
    (f) Federal fiscal year means a period of 12 calendar months 
beginning October 1 of any calendar year and ending September 30 of the 
following calendar year.
    (g) FCS means the Food and Consumer Service of the Department.
    (h) FCSRO means the appropriate Regional Office of the Food and 
Consumer Service of the Department.
    (i) Institution means any licensed, nonschool, public or private 
nonprofit organization providing day care services where children are 
not maintained in permanent residence, including but not limited to day 
care centers, settlement houses, after school recreation centers, 
neighborhood centers, Head Start centers, and organizations providing 
day care services for handicapped children and includes a sponsoring 
organization under the Child Care Food Program regulations.
    (j) National School Lunch Program means the lunch program authorized 
by the National School Lunch Act.
    (k) Needs assessment means a systematic process for delineating the 
scope, extent (quantity), reach and success of any current nutrition 
education activities, including those relating to:
    (1) Methods and materials available inside and outside the 
classroom; (2) training of teachers in the principles of nutrition and 
in nutrition education strategies, methods, and techniques; (3) training 
of school foodservice personnel in the principles and practices of 
foodservice management; and (4) compilation of existing data concerning 
factors impacting on nutrition education and training such as statistics 
on child health and competency levels achieved by foodservice personnel.
    (l) Program costs means costs, other than administrative costs, 
incurred in connection with any or all of the following:
    (1) The State Coordinator's salary, and related support personnel 
costs, including fringe benefits and travel expenses; (2) applying for 
assessment and planning funds; (3) the conduct of the needs assessment; 
(4) the development of the State Plan; and (5) the implementation of the 
approved State Plan, including related support services.
    (m) Program means the Nutrition Education and Training Program 
authorized by section 19 of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966, as amended.
    (n) School means: (1) An educational unit of high school grade or 
under operating under public or nonprofit private ownership in a single 
building or complex of buildings. The term ``high school grade or 
under'' includes classes of preprimary grade when they are conducted in 
a school having classes of primary or higher grade, or when they are 
recognized as a part of the educational system in the State, regardless 
of whether such preprimary grade classes are conducted in a school 
having classes of primary or higher grade.
    (2) With the exception of residential summer camps which participate 
in the Summer Food Service Program for Children and private foster 
homes, any distinct part of a public or nonprofit private institution or 
any public or nonprofit private child care institution, which (i) 
maintains children in residence, (ii) operates principally for the care 
of children and (iii) if private, is licensed to provide residential 
child care services under the appropriate licensing code by the State or 
a subordinate level of government. The term ``child care institution'' 
includes, but is not limited to: Homes for the mentally retarded, the 
emotionally disturbed, the physically handicapped, and unmarried mothers 
and their infants; group homes; halfway houses; orphanages; temporary 
shelters for

[[Page 225]]

abused children and for runaway children; long term care facilities of 
chronically ill children; and juvenile detention centers.
    (3) With respect to the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, non-profit 
child care centers certified as such by the Governor of Puerto Rico.
    (o) School Breakfast Program means the program authorized by section 
4 of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966, as amended.
    (p) Foodservice personnel means those individuals responsible for 
planning, preparing, serving and otherwise operating foodservice 
programs funded by USDA grants as provided for in the National School 
Lunch Act and the Child Nutrition Act of 1966.
    (q) State means any of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, the 
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, 
the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, and the Northern Mariana 
Islands.
    (r) State agency means the State educational agency.
    (s) State educational agency means, as the State legislature may 
determine:
    (1) The Chief State School Officer (such as the State Superintendent 
of Public Instruction, Commissioner of Education, or similar officer), 
or (2) a board of education controlling the State Department of 
Education.


<R05>
Sec. 227.3  Administration.

    (a) Within the Department, FCS shall act on behalf of the Department 
in the administration of the Program.
    (b) Within the States, responsibility for administration of the 
Program shall be in the State agency, except that FCSRO shall administer 
the Program with respect to nonprofit private schools or institutions in 
any State where the State agency is prohibited by law from administering 
the Program in nonprofit private schools or institutions.


<R05>
Sec. 227.4  Application and agreement.

    After the initial fiscal year of participation each State agency 
desiring to take part in the Program shall enter into a written 
agreement with the Department for the administration of the Program in 
accordance with the provisions of this part. The State agency shall 
execute Form FCS-74, which shall constitute the written agreement.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
0584-0062)

(44 U.S.C. 3506)

[44 FR 28282, May 15, 1979, as amended at 47 FR 746, Jan. 2, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 227.5  Program funding.

    (a) Total grant. The total grant to each State agency for each 
fiscal year for program costs and administrative costs shall consist of 
an amount equal to 50 cents per child enrolled in schools and 
institutions within the State during such year, but in no event shall 
such grant be less than $50,000: Provided, however, That a State's total 
grant shall be reduced proportionately if the State does not administer 
the program in nonprofit private schools and institutions. If funds 
appropriated for a fiscal year are insufficient to pay the amount to 
which each State is entitled, the amount of such grant shall be ratably 
reduced to the extent necessary so that the total of the amounts paid to 
each State does not exceed the amount of appropriated funds. Each State 
agency which receives funds based on all children enrolled in public and 
nonprofit private schools and institutions shall make the Program 
available to those schools and institutions. Enrollment figures shall be 
the latest available as certified by the Department of Education.
    (b) First fiscal year participation--(1) Assessment and planning 
grant. A portion of the total grant shall be made available to each 
State agency during its first fiscal year of participation as an 
assessment and planning grant for:
    (i) Employing a State Coordinator, as provided for in Sec. 227.30, 
and related support personnel costs including fringe benefits and travel 
expenses, (ii) undertaking a needs assessment in the State, (iii) 
developing a State Plan for nutrition education and training within the 
State, and (iv) applying for the State assessment and planning grant.
    (2) Advances for the assessment and planning grant. FCS shall make 
advances to any State desiring to participate in the Program, to enable 
the State to carry out the responsibilities set forth in paragraph 
(b)(1) of this section. Advances shall be made in two

[[Page 226]]

phases, in accordance with the following procedures:
    (i) Initially, State agencies may receive an advance up to $35,000 
for the purpose of hiring a State coordinator, as provided for in 
Sec. 227.30. Application for such an advance shall be made on Form AD-
623 when the State agency applies for participation in the Program. The 
information required for this advance shall be set out in Part III, 
Budget Information, Section B, Budget Categories. The State agency shall 
there indicate the funds required for the salary, travel, and fringe 
benefits of the State Coordinator, and related personnel costs necessary 
to carry out the duties and responsibilities of the State Coordinator.
    (ii) After appointment of the State Coordinator, the State agency 
may receive an additional advance of up to 50 percent of the total grant 
to which the State agency is entitled for the first year of 
participation, after deduction of the advance made for the State 
Coordinator under Sec. 227.5(b)(2), but not to exceed $100,000, for the 
purpose of undertaking a needs assessment in the State, developing a 
State Plan for nutrition education and training, and applying for the 
assessment and planning grant. Application for such advance shall be 
made by amending Part III, Budget Information, of Form AD-623.
    (3) Funds for implementing State plan. (i) States receiving 
advances. Each State agency shall receive the remaining portion of its 
total grant in order to implement its State plan, which has been 
approved by FCS, if the State agency has carried out the 
responsibilities for which advances were received. With the submission 
of the State plan each State agency may apply for the funds remaining of 
its total grant.
    (ii) States previously participating. Those States which previously 
participated may apply for their total grant upon submission of the 
State Plan.
    (c) Administrative costs. Each State agency may use up to 15 percent 
of its total grant for up to 50 percent of its cash expenditures for 
administrative costs.
    (d) Payment to State agencies. Approval of the State plan by FCS is 
a prerequisite to the payment of funds to the State agency. All funds 
made available for the Program shall be provided through a letter of 
credit or check, as determined by FCS.
    (e) Unobligated funds. The State agency will release to FCS any 
Federal funds made available to it under the Program which are 
unobligated by September 30 of each fiscal year.
    (f) Funds for existing programs. State agencies shall maintain their 
present level of funding for existing nutrition education and training 
programs. FCS funds for the Program shall augment current nutrition 
education and training programs and projects. Funds made available by 
FCS for this Program shall not replace such funds.

[44 FR 28282, May 15, 1979, as amended at 52 FR 8223, Mar. 17, 1987]


<R04>
                   Subpart B--State Agency Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 227.30  Responsibilities of State agencies.

    (a) General. Except to the extent that it would be inconsistent with 
this part, the Program shall be administered in accordance with the 
applicable provisions of the Departmental regulations 7 CFR part 3015.
    (b) Application. For the initial fiscal year of participation States 
shall make application for administration of the Program on Form and are 
responsible for amending Form AD-623 to request advance funding. In the 
initial application, in connection with the request for advance funding 
for the State Coordinator, part IV, Program Narrative, of Form AD-623 
shall indicate the State agency's procedures for hiring a State 
Coordinator and contain a justification for the dollar value of salary 
requested. The narrative shall also indicate the time frame for hiring 
the State Coordinator. In amending Form AD-623 in connection with the 
request for advance funding for the remaining portion of the assessment 
and planning grant, part IV, Program Narrative, shall set forth the 
details for areas of the assessment and planning grant, other than 
employment of the State Coordinator.
    (b-1) If any State does not apply for participation in the Program, 
by April 1 of a fiscal year by submitting Form AD 623 as required in 
Sec. 227.30(b) and

[[Page 227]]

Sec. 227.5(b)(2)(i), the State's share of the funds shall be provided to 
the remaining States, so long as this does not take the remaining 
States' grants above 50 cents per child enrolled in schools or 
institutions, except in those States which receive a minimum grant of 
$75,000 for a fiscal year.
    (c) State Coordinator. After execution of the agreement the State 
agency shall appoint a nutrition education specialist to serve as a 
State Coordinator for the Program who may be employed on a full-time or 
part-time basis. The State Coordinator may be a State employee who 
reports directly or indirectly to the Chief State School Officer or an 
individual under contract with the State agency to serve as the State 
Coordinator. A State agency shall not contract with an organization to 
provide for the services of a State Coordinator. The State Coordinator, 
at a minimum, shall meet both of the following requirements:
    (1) The State Coordinator shall have a Masters degree or equivalent 
experience. Equivalent experience is experience related to the position 
being filled or as defined by State civil service or personnel policies. 
If the Masters degree is not in foods and nutrition or dietetics, the 
Bachelors degree shall include academic preparations in foods and 
nutrition or dietetics.
    (2) In addition, the State Coordinator shall have recognized and 
demonstrated skills in management and education through at least three 
years experience in one or more of these areas: Elementary or secondary 
education, but not limited to classroom teaching; foodservice management 
and training for adults; community nutrition or public health programs; 
foodservice operations for children; or community action or assistance 
programs.
    (d) Needs assessment. Each State agency shall conduct an ongoing 
needs assessment in accordance with Sec. 227.36 The needs assessment 
shall be the data base utilized in formulating the State plan for each 
fiscal year. For the first year of participation a State agency may 
apply for funds in order to carry out the needs assessment in accordance 
with Sec. 227.5.
    (e) Developing and submitting the State plan. Each State agency 
shall submit to the Secretary a State plan for Nutrition Education and 
Training in accordance with Sec. 227.37 prior to the beginning of each 
fiscal year. The date of submission for the State plan shall be 
designated by the Secretary. The Secretary shall act on the submitted 
State plan within 60 days after it is received. For the first year of 
participation the State agency shall submit to the Secretary, within 
nine months after the award of the planning and assessment grant, a 
State plan for nutrition education and training in accordance with 
Sec. 227.37.
    (f) Records and reports. (1) Each State agency shall maintain full 
and complete records concerning Program operations and shall retain such 
records in accordance with OMB Circular A-102 Attachment C.
    (2) Each State agency shall submit to FCS a quarterly Financial 
Status Report, Form SF-269, as required by OMB Circular A-102, 
Attachment H.
    (3) Each State agency shall submit an annual performance report 
(Form FCS-42) to FCS within 30 days after the close of the Fiscal Year.
    (4) Each State agency shall maintain a financial management system 
in accordance with Federal Management Circular 74-4 and OMB Circular A-
102, Attachment G.
    (5) Each State agency shall comply with the requirements of OMB 
Circular A-102, Attachments N and O, and Federal Management Circular 74-
4, for property management and the procurement of supplies, equipment 
and other services with these Program funds.
    (6) Any income accruing to a State or local agency because of the 
Program shall be used in accordance with OMB Circular A-102, Attachment 
E.

[[Page 228]]

    (g) Nondiscrimination. Each State agency shall ensure that Program 
operations are in compliance with the Department's nondiscrimination 
regulations (part 15 of this title) issued under title VI of the Civil 
Rights Act of 1964.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
0584-0062)

(44 U.S.C. 3506; E.O. 12372, July 14, 1982, 47 FR 30959, sec. 401(b) of 
the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act of 1968 (31 U.S.C. 6506(c))

[44 FR 28282, May 15, 1979, as amended at 45 FR 14842, Mar. 7, 1980; 47 
FR 746, Jan. 7, 1982; 47 FR 22072, May 21, 1982; 48 FR 29123, June 24, 
1983; 48 FR 39213, Aug. 30, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 227.31  Audits, management reviews, and evaluations.

    (a) Audits. (1) Examinations by the State agencies in the form of 
audits or internal audits shall be performed in accord with OMB Circular 
A-102, Attachment G.
    (b) Management reviews. The State agency is responsible for meeting 
the following requirements:
    (1) The State agency shall establish management evaluation and 
review procedures to monitor compliance with the State plan for local 
educational agencies and land grant colleges, other institutions of 
higher education and public or private nonprofit educational or research 
agencies, institutions, or organizations.
    (2) The State agency shall require participating agencies to 
establish program review procedures to be used in reviewing the Agencies 
operations and those of subsidiaries or contractors.
    (c) Evaluations. The State agency shall conduct formal evaluations 
of program activities at least annually. These evaluations shall be 
aimed at assessing the effectiveness of the various activities 
undertaken by the State and local agencies. State officials shall 
analyze why some activities have proved effective while others have not 
and shall initiate appropriate improvements. The results of the 
evaluations shall be used to make adjustments in ongoing activities and 
to plan activities and programs for the next year's State plan. The 
State agency shall submit a plan for evaluation of Program activities as 
part of the State plan in accordance with Sec. 227.37(b)(14).

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
0584-0062)

(44 U.S.C. 3506; E.O. 12372 (July 14, 1982, 47 FR 30959); sec. 401(b) 
Intergovernmental Cooperation Act of 1968 (31 U.S.C. 6506(c))

[44 FR 28282, May 15, 1979, as amended at 47 FR 746, Jan. 7, 1982; 48 FR 
29123, June 24, 1983]


<R04>
                 Subpart C--State Coordinator Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 227.35  Responsibilities of State coordinator.

    At a minimum, the State Coordinator shall be responsible for: (a) 
Preparation of a budget, (b) the conduct of the needs assessment, (c) 
development of a State plan, (d) implementation of the approved State 
Plan, (e) evaluation of the progress and implementation of the State 
Plan, (f) coordination of the Program with the Child Nutrition Programs 
at the State and local levels, (g) coordination of the Program with 
other nutrition education and training programs conducted with Federal 
or State funds, (h) communication of needs and accomplishments of State 
nutrition education and training programs to parents and the communty at 
large, (i) use of Program funds in compliance with all regulations, 
instructions, or other guidance material provided by FCS, (j) 
coordinating the submission and preparation of the Program financial 
status report (SF-269), and (k) annual evaluation of the effectiveness 
of the State Plan.


<R05>
Sec. 227.36  Requirements of needs assessment.

    (a) The needs assessment is an ongoing process which identifies the 
discrepancies between ``what should be'' and ``what is'' and shall be 
applied to each category listed below to enable State agencies to 
determine their nutrition education and training needs for each year. 
The needs assessment shall identify the following as a minimum:
    (1) Children, teachers, and food service personnel in need of 
nutrition education and training; (2) existing State or federally funded 
nutrition education and training programs including their: (i) Goals and 
objectives; (ii) source and

[[Page 229]]

level of funding; (iii) any available documentation of their relative 
success or failure; and (iv) factors contributing to their success or 
failure; (3) offices or agencies at the State and local level designated 
to be responsible for nutrition education and training of teachers and 
school food service personnel; (4) any relevant State nutrition 
education mandates; (5) funding levels at the State and local level for 
preservice and inservice nutrition education and training of food 
service personnel and teachers; (6) State and local individuals, and 
groups conducting nutrition education and training; (7) materials which 
are currently available for nutrition education and training programs, 
and determine for each: (i) Subject area and content covered; (ii) grade 
level; (iii) how utilized; (iv) acceptability by user; (v) currency of 
materials; (8) any major child nutrition related health problems in each 
State; (9) existing sources of primary and secondary data, including any 
data that has been collected for documenting the State's nutrition 
education and training needs; (10) available documentation of the 
competencies of teachers in the area of nutrition education; (11) 
available documentation of the competencies of food service personnel; 
(12) problems encountered by schools and institutions in procuring 
nutritious food economically and in preparing nutritious appetizing 
meals and areas where training can assist in alleviating these problems; 
(13) problems teachers encounter in conducting effective nutrition 
education activities and areas where inservice training or materials can 
assist in alleviating these problems; (14) problems in dietary habits of 
children and areas where nutrition education may assist in positive 
changes; (15) problems encountered in coordinating the nutrition 
education by teachers with the meal preparation and activities of the 
food service facility and areas where training might alleviate these 
problems.
    (b) The needs assessment should be an ongoing process and provide 
not only data on current activities but also a description of the 
problems and needs in each category and whether training or materials 
would help alleviate the identified problems.


<R05>
Sec. 227.37  State plan for nutrition education and training.

    (a) General. Each fiscal year the State agency shall submit a State 
plan for Nutrition Education and Training for approval to FCS. The State 
plan shall be based on the needs identified from the ongoing needs 
assessment and evaluation of the State plans from previous years. The 
State plan shall be submitted in accordance with Sec. 227.30(e). 
Guidance for the preparation and submission of the State plan shall be 
provided by FCS.
    (b) Requirements for the State plan. The State plan shall provide 
the following:
    (1) Description of the ongoing needs assessment conducted within the 
State;
    (2) The findings of the needs assessment within the State used to 
determine the goals and objectives of the State plan and results of the 
evaluation of the previous years' State plans for:
    (i) Inservice training of food service personnel, (ii) nutrition 
education of children, (iii) inservice training in nutrition education 
for teachers;
    (3) Goals and objectives of the State plan;
    (4) Identification of the priority populations to be reached during 
the fiscal year;
    (5) Provisions for coordinating the nutrition education and training 
programs carried out with funds made available under this part with any 
related publicly supported programs being carried out within the State 
to include:
    (i) Identification of existing programs that may be utilized, (ii) 
description of how representatives of such groups are to be involved in 
the planning and implementation of the State program; (iii) criteria and 
procedure for selection of such representatives;
    (6) Plans to solicit advice and recommendations of the National 
Advisory Council on Child Nutrition, State educational or other 
appropriate agencies; the U.S. Department of Education; the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services; and other interested groups and 
individuals concerned with improvement of child nutrition.

[[Page 230]]

    (7) Plans, including a timetable, for reaching all children in the 
State with instruction in the nutritional value of foods and the 
relationship among food, nutrition and health, for inservice training of 
food service personnel in the principles and skills of food service 
management and nutrition and for inservice instruction for teachers in 
sound principles of nutrition education;
    (8) Any plans for using, on a priority basis, the resources of the 
land-grant colleges eligible to receive funds under the Act of July 2, 
1862 (12 Stat. 503; 7 U.S.C. 301 through 305, 307, and 308) or the Act 
of August 30, 1890 (26 Stat. 417, as amended; 7 U.S.C. 312 through 326 
and 328), including the Tuskegee Institute;
    (9) A brief description of the program or activities to be 
contracted with land-grant colleges, described above, and other 
institutions of higher education, and other public or private nonprofit 
educational or research agencies, institutions or organizations for 
carrying out nutrition education and training activities;
    (10) A brief description of pilot projects, including objectives, 
subject matter and expected outcomes, to be contracted with the land-
grant colleges described above, other institutions of higher education, 
public and nonprofit educational or research agencies, institutions, or 
organizations for but not limited to projects for development, 
demonstration, testing and evaluation of curricula for use in early 
childhood, elementary, and secondary education programs;
    (11) Identification of schools, school districts, and sponsoring 
agencies which may agree to participate in the nutrition education and 
training program;
    (12) A brief description of (i) State agency sponsored pilot 
projects including objectives, subject matter and anticipated outcomes 
and (ii) nutrition education and training programs to be conducted by 
schools, school districts, and sponsoring agencies receiving funds under 
this provision including objectives, subject matter and expected 
outcomes;
    (13) Time frame and milestones for implementation of State plans;
    (14) Plans to evaluate program activities including an evaluation 
component for each objective of the State plan;
    (15) Description of staff available to perform State agency 
responsibilities of the State nutrition education and training program 
which includes:
    (i) Definition of duties and responsibilities, (ii) minimum 
professional qualifications, (iii) number and classification of 
personnel;
    (16) A description of the procedures used to comply with the 
requirements of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, including 
racial and ethnic participation data collection, public notification 
procedures and the annual civil rights compliance review process;
    (17) Plans for the conduct of audits in accordance with Sec. 227.31;
    (18) A budget detailing the use of program funds;
    (19) Description of the financial management system in accordance 
with Sec. 227.30(e);
    (20) Description of the management evaluation and review procedures 
established in accordance with Sec. 227.31(b); and
    (21) Other components that the States determine necessary.
    (c) States eligible to receive additional funds pursuant to 
Sec. 227.30(b-1) shall submit an amendment to the State plan to the Food 
and Consumer Service Regional Office for prior approval.

[44 FR 28282, May 15, 1979, as amended at 45 FR 14842, Mar. 7, 1980; 48 
FR 39213, Aug. 30, 1983]


<R04>
                        Subpart D--Miscellaneous


<R05>
Sec. 227.40  Program information.

    Persons desiring information concerning the program may write to the 
appropriate State agency or Regional Office of FCS as indicated below:
    (a) In the States of Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New 
Hampshire, Rhode Island, and Vermont: New England Regional Office, FCS, 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, 33 North Avenue, Burlington, Mass. 
01803.
    (b) In the States of Delaware, District of Columbia, Maryland, New 
Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Puerto Rico, Virginia, Virgin Islands, 
and West Virginia: Mid-Atlantic Regional

[[Page 231]]

Office, FCS, U.S. Department of Agriculture, One Vahlsing Center, 
Robbinsville, N.J. 08691.
    (c) In the States of Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, 
Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Tennessee: Southeast 
Regional Office, FCS, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 1100 Spring Street 
NW., Atlanta, Ga. 30309.
    (d) In the States of Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Ohio, 
and Wisconsin: Midwest Regional Office, FCS, U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, 536 South Clark Street, Chicago, Ill. 60605.
    (e) In the States of Colorado, Iowa, Kansas, Missouri, Montana, 
Nebraska, North Dakota, South Dakota, Utah, and Wyoming: Mountain Plains 
Regional Office, FCS, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 2420 West 26th 
Avenue, Room 430D, Denver, Colo. 80211.
    (f) In the States of Arkansas, Louisiana, New Mexico, Oklahoma, and 
Texas: Southwest Regional Office, FCS, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
1100 Commerce Street, Room 5-C-30, Dallas, Tex. 75242.
    (g) In the States of Alaska, American Samoa, Arizona, California, 
Guam, Hawaii, Idaho, Nevada, Oregon, Trust Territory of the Pacific 
Islands, the Northern Mariana Islands, and Washington: Western Regional 
Office, FCS, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 550 Kearny Street, Room 
400, San Francisco, Calif. 94108.


<R05>
Sec. 227.41  Recovery of funds.

    (a) FCS may recover funds from a State agency under any of the 
following conditions:
    (1) If FCS determines, through a review of the State agency's 
reports, program, or financial analysis, monitoring, audit or otherwise, 
that the State agency's performance is inadequate or that the State 
agency has failed to comply with this part or FCS instructions and 
guidelines.
    (2) If FCS determines that the State agency is not expending funds 
at a rate commensurate with the amount of funds distributed or provided 
for expenditure under the program.
    (3) If FCS determines that a State agency is not providing full and 
timely reports.
    (b) FCS shall effect such recoveries of funds through adjustments in 
the amount of funds provided under the program.


<R05>
Sec. 227.42  Grant closeout procedures.

    The requirements of OMB Circular A-102, Attachment L, are applicable 
in the termination of any grant under this part.


<R05>
Sec. 227.43  Participation of adults.

    Nothing in this part shall prohibit a State or local educational 
agency from making available or distributing to adults education 
materials, resources, activities or programs authorized by this part.


<R05>
Sec. 227.44  Management evaluations and reviews.

    FCS shall establish evaluation procedures to determine whether State 
agencies carry out the purpose and provisions of this part, the State 
agency plan and FCS guidelines and instructions. To the maximum extent 
possible the State's performance shall be reviewed and evaluated by FCS 
on a regular basis including the use of public hearings.


APPENDIX TO PART 227--APPORTIONMENT OF FUNDS FOR NUTRITION EDUCATION AND 
                                TRAINING

    Pursuant to sections 19(j) of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966, as 
amended (42 U.S.C. 1788), funds available for the fiscal year ending 
September 30, 1980, are apportioned among the States as follows:

[[Page 232]]

                  [See footnotes at the end of Table.]

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                     Residential     Nonresidential             
                 State                     Public      Private       child care        child care      Total \5\
                                        schools \1\  schools \2\  institutions \3\  institutions \4\            
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Connecticut...........................      231,069      38,488          1,260             2,866         273,683
Maine.................................       93,406       6,538            387               808         101,139
Massachusetts.........................      420,866      68,337          2,697             5,352         497,252
New Hampshire.........................       67,087       7,978            331             1,160          76,556
Rhode Island..........................       62,521      12,570            304               767          76,162
Vermont...............................       39,419       3,814            247               579          75,000
                                            914,368     137,725          5,226            11,532       1,099,792
Delaware..............................       43,210       7,277            107             1,339          75,000
District of Columbia..................       44,309       7,511            447             2,458          75,000
Maryland..............................      315,196      51,992          1,292             5,234         373,714
New Jersey............................      520,438     117,060          3,930             8,588         650,016
New York..............................    1,204,026     274,593         14,068            19,756       1,512,443
Pennsylvania..........................      796,518     182,089          9,026             7,312         994,945
Puerto Rico...........................      280,750      36,776              0                 0         317,526
Virginia..............................      410,660      34,947          6,239             6,068         457,914
Virgin Islands........................        9,783       2,452             11                 0          75,000
West Virginia.........................      154,000       4,942            770               854         160,566
                                          3,778,890     719,639         35,890            51,609       4,692,124
Alabama...............................      296,412      21,949            892            10,607         329,860
Florida...............................      589,122      57,440          2,116            19,074         667,752
Georgia \5\...........................      424,042      27,708          2,783            14,806         469,339
Kentucky..............................      269,690      27,786          3,685             3,652         304,813
Mississippi...........................      192,134      25,802            541            12,175         230,652
North Carolina........................      452,523      22,104          3,052            19,722         497,401
South Carolina \5\....................      243,200      19,225          1,255             6,559         270,239
Tennessee.............................      339,753      17,396          1,448             7,847         366,444
                                          2,806,876     219,410         15,772            94,442       3,136,500
Illinois..............................      793,671     160,491          5,343            15,971         975,476
Indiana...............................      433,267      39,967          2,814             5,279         481,327
Michigan..............................      747,374      85,655          3,069             7,817         843,915
Minnesota.............................      314,333      38,994          1,245             3,135         357,707
Ohio..................................      818,192     110,561          5,836            10,767         945,356
Wisconsin.............................      344,962      73,707          1,922             3,579         424,170
                                          3,451,799     509,375         20,229            46,548       4,027,951
Arkansas..............................      177,730       8,095            385             4,453         190,663
Louisiana.............................      317,817      64,562          1,551             6,307         390,237
New Mexico............................      108,673       5,448            235             2,619         116,975
Oklahoma..............................      229,166       3,969          1,916             8,639         243,690
Texas.................................    1,115,829      52,654          4,163            38,934       1,211,580
                                          1,949,215     134,728          8,250            60,952       2,153,145
Colorado \5\..........................      217,264      15,800            937             4,399         238,400
Iowa..................................      221,255      25,957          3,204             2,631         253,047
Kansas................................      168,720      12,765            330             1,062         182,877
Missouri..............................      350,248      54,950          1,271             6,629         413,098
Montana...............................       63,950       3,425             75               677          75,000
Nebraska..............................      115,891      17,629            376             1,694         135,590
North Dakota \5\......................       47,486       4,826            309               383          75,000
South Dakota..........................       53,792       5,760            267               390          75,000
Utah..................................      126,488       1,518            541             1,325         129,872
Wyoming...............................       36,709       1,206             74               497          75,000
                                          1,401,803     143,836          7,384            19,687       1,652,884
Alaska................................       35,308         739            310               392          75,000
Samoa.................................        3,616         778              0                 0          75,000
Arizona...............................      198,407      21,871            661             4,712         225,651
California............................    1,629,801     170,376         28,777            44,277       1,873,231
Guam..................................       11,118       1,985              0                 0          75,000
Hawaii................................       66,454      13,348          1,854             3,352          85,008
Idaho.................................       79,009       1,868            119               860          81,856
Nevada................................       56,927       2,179            473             1,643          75,000
Oregon................................      183,441       9,379            859             3,703         197,382
Trust Territory.......................       11,590           0              0                 0          75,000
Washington............................      299,362      17,318          2,140             5,656         324,476
N Marianas............................        1,945           0              0                 0          75,000
                                          2,576,978     239,841         35,193            64,595       3,237,604
                                         16,879,929   2,104,554        127,944           349,365      20,000,000
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Sources: (1) U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, Education Division, NCES, Statistics of     
  Public Schools, Fall 1977, prepublication data, Table 5 for States and areas, except (2) Northern Marianas and
  Trust Territory, 1975-76 data from Department of Interior, adjust to include pre-school; Puerto Rico and Guam,
  Fall 1976 data.                                                                                               

[[Page 233]]

                                                                                                                
\2\ U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, Education Division, (NCES). Digest of Education          
  Statistics, 1976, Table 46, p. 47, Northern Marianas and Trust Territory 1975-76 data from Department of      
  Interior, adjust to include pre-school.                                                                       
\3\ U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service, Annual Report of Meal Service in Schools (Form  
  FNS-47), October 1978.                                                                                        
\4\ U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, Day Care Centers In the U.S.; A National Profile 1976-77,
  Volume 3 of the Final Report of the National Day Care Study, Table 63.                                        
\5\ A portion of these funds will be withheld from the States' allocations for use by FCS in administering the  
  Program in nonprofit private schools or institutions.                                                         


[44 FR 70451, Dec. 7, 1979]


<R03>
PART 235--STATE ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSE FUNDS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
235.1  General purpose and scope.
235.2  Definitions.
235.3  Administration.
235.4  Allocation of funds to States.
235.5  Payments to States.
235.6  Use of funds.
235.7  Records and reports.
235.8  Management evaluations and audits.
235.9  Procurement and property management standards.
235.10  [Reserved]
235.11  Other provisions.
235.12  Information collection/recordkeeping--OMB assigned control 
          numbers.

    Authority: Secs. 7 and 10 of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966, 80 
Stat. 888, 889, as amended (42 U.S.C. 1776, 1779).

    Source: 41 FR 32405, Aug. 3, 1976, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 235.1  General purpose and scope.

    This part announces the policies and prescribes the regulations 
necessary to carry out the provisions of section 7 of the Child 
Nutrition Act of 1966, as amended. It prescribes the methods for making 
payments of funds to State agencies for use for administrative expenses 
incurred in supervising and giving technical assistance in connection 
with activities undertaken by them under the National School Lunch 
Program (7 CFR part 210), the Special Milk Program (7 CFR part 215), the 
School Breakfast Program (7 CFR part 220), the Child and Adult Care Food 
Program (7 CFR part 226) and the Food Distribution Program (7 CFR part 
250).

(Sec. 7, Pub. L. 95-627, 92 Stat. 3621 (42 U.S.C. 1776))

[44 FR 51185, Aug. 31, 1979, as amended by Amdt. 17, 55 FR 1378, Jan. 
16, 1990; 60 FR 15461, Mar. 24, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 235.2   Definitions.

    For the purpose of this part, the term:
    (a) Act means the Child Nutrition Act of 1966, as amended.
    (b) CND means the Child Nutrition Division of the Food and Consumer 
Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
    (c) Department means the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
    (d) Distributing agency means a State agency which enters into an 
agreement with the Department for the distribution of donated foods 
pursuant to part 250 of this title.
    (e) [Reserved]
    (f) FCS means the Food and Consumer Service of the U.S. Department 
of Agriculture.
    (g) FCSRO means the appropriate Food and Consumer Service Regional 
Office of the Food and Consumer Service of the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture.
    (h) Fiscal year means a period of 12 calendar months beginning 
October 1, 1976, and October 1 of each calendar year thereafter and 
ending with September 30 of the following calendar year.
    (i) Institution means a child or adult care center or a sponsoring 
organization as defined in part 226 of this chapter.
    (j)-(k) [Reserved]
    (l) OIG means the Office of the Inspector General of the Department.
    (m) [Reserved]
    (n) SAE means federally provided State administrative expense funds 
for State agencies under this part.
    (o) School means: (1) An educational unit of high school grade or 
under, recognized as part of the educational system in the State and 
operating under public or nonprofit private ownership in a single 
building or complex of buildings; (2) any public or nonprofit private 
classes of preprimary grade

[[Page 234]]

when they are conducted in the aforementioned schools; (3) any public or 
nonprofit private residential child care institution, or distinct part 
of such institution, which operates principally for the care of 
children, and, if private, is licensed to provide residential child care 
services under the appropriate licensing code by the State or a 
subordinate level of government, except for residential summer camps 
which participate in the Summer Food Service Program for Children, Job 
Corps centers funded by the Department of Labor, and private foster 
homes. The term ``residential child care institutions'' includes, but is 
not limited to: Homes for the mentally, emotionally or physically 
impaired, and unmarried mothers and their infants; group homes; halfway 
houses; orphanages; temporary shelters for abused children and for 
runaway children; long-term care facilities for chronically ill 
children; and juvenile detention centers. A long-term care facility is a 
hospital, skilled nursing facility, intermediate care facility, or 
distinct part thereof, which is intended for the care of children 
confined for 30 days or more; or (4) with respect to the Commonwealth of 
Puerto Rico, nonprofit child care centers certified as such by the 
Governor of Puerto Rico.
    (p) School Food Authority means the governing body which is 
responsible for the administration of one or more schools and which has 
the legal authority to operate a breakfast or a lunch program therein. 
The term ``School Food Authority'' also includes a nonprofit agency or 
organization to which such governing body has delegated authority to 
operate the lunch or breakfast program in schools under its 
jurisdiction, provided the governing body retains the responsibility to 
comply with breakfast or lunch program regulations.
    (q) Secretary means the Secretary of Agriculture.
    (q-1) 7 CFR part 3015 means the Uniform Federal Assistance 
Regulations published by the Department to implement Office of 
Management and Budget Circulars A-21, A-87, A-102, A-110, A-122, and A-
128; the Single Audit Act of 1984 (31 U.S.C. 7501 et seq.); and 
Executive Order 12372.

    Note: OMB Circulars, referred to in this definition, are available 
from the EOP Publications, New Executive Office Building, 726 Jackson 
Place NW., Room 2200, Washington, DC 20503.

    (r) State means any of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, the 
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, or the Republic 
of Palau.
    (s) State agency means (1) the State educational agency or (2) such 
other agency of the State as has been designated by the Governor or 
other appropriate executive or legislative authority of the State and 
approved by the Department to administer programs under part 210, 215, 
220, 226 or 250 of this title. Unless otherwise indicated, ``State 
agency'' shall also mean ``distributing agency'', as defined in 
Sec. 235.2(d), when such agency is receiving funds directly from FCS 
under this part.
    (t) State educational agency means, as the State legislature may 
determine: (1) The chief State school officer (such as the State 
Superintendent of Public Instruction, Commissioner of Education, or 
similar officer), or (2) a board of education controlling the State 
department of education.

(Sec. 7, Pub. L. 95-627, 92 Stat. 3621 (42 U.S.C. 1776); sec. 205, Pub. 
L. 96-499, The Omnibus Reconciliation Act of 1980, 94 Stat. 2599; secs. 
807 and 808, Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 521-535 (42 U.S.C. 1772, 1784, 
1760); Pub. L. 79-396, 60 Stat. 231 (42 U.S.C. 1751); Pub. L. 89-642, 80 
Stat. 885-890 (42 U.S.C. 1773); Pub. L. 91-248, 84 Stat. 207 (42 U.S.C. 
1759)

[41 FR 32405, Aug. 3, 1976, as amended at 44 FR 48957, Aug. 21, 1979; 44 
FR 51185, Aug. 31, 1979; Amdt. 9, 48 FR 19355, Apr. 29, 1983; Amdt. 14, 
51 FR 27151, July 30, 1986; 54 FR 2991, Jan. 23, 1989; Amdt. 17, 55 FR 
1378, Jan. 16, 1990; 60 FR 15461, Mar. 24, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 235.3  Administration.

    (a) Within the Department, FCS shall act on behalf of the Department 
in the administration of the program for payment to States of State 
administrative expense funds covered by this part. Within FCS, CND shall 
be responsible for administration of the program.
    (b) Each State agency desiring to receive payments under this part 
shall enter into a written agreement with the Department. Each agreement 
shall cover the operation of the Program during the period specified 
therein and

[[Page 235]]

may be extended at the option of the Department.

(Sec. 14, Pub. L. 95-166, 91 Stat. 1338 (42 U.S.C. 1776); sec. 7, Pub. 
L. 95-627, 92 Stat. 3621 (42 U.S.C. 1776))

[41 FR 32405, Aug. 3, 1976, as amended at 44 FR 48957, Aug. 21, 1979; 
Amdt. 14, 51 FR 27151, July 30, 1986]


<R05>
Sec. 235.4  Allocation of funds to States.

    (a) Nondiscretionary SAE Funds. For each fiscal year, FCS shall 
allocate the following:
    (1) To each State which administers the National School Lunch, 
School Breakfast or Special Milk Programs an amount equal to one (1) 
percent of the funds expended by such State during the second preceding 
fiscal year under sections 4 and 11 of the National School Lunch Act, as 
amended, and sections 3, 4 and 17A of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966, 
as amended. However, the total amount allocated to any State under this 
paragraph shall not be less than $100,000 or the amount allocated to the 
State in the fiscal year ending September 30, 1981, whichever is 
greater.
    (2) To each State which administers the Child and Adult Care Food 
Program an amount equal to the sum of: Twenty percent of the first 
$50,000; ten percent of the next $100,000; five percent of the next 
$250,000; and two and one-half percent of any remaining funds expended 
within the State under section 17 of the National School Lunch Act, as 
amended, during the second preceding fiscal year. FCS may adjust the 
amount of any such allocation in accordance with changes in the size of 
the Child and Adult Care Food Program in a State.
    (b) Discretionary SAE Funds. For each fiscal year, FCS shall provide 
the following additional allocations:
    (1) Allocate $30,000 to each State which administers the Child and 
Adult Care Food Program (7 CFR part 226).
    (2) $30,000 to each State which administers the Food Distribution 
Program (part 250 of this chapter) in schools and/or institutions which 
participate in programs under parts 210, 220, 226 of this chapter.
    (3) Amounts derived by application of the following four-part 
formula to each State agency which is allocated funds under paragraph 
(a) of this section:
    (i) One equal share of forty (40) percent of the funds designated by 
FCS for the reviews conducted under Sec. 210.18 or Sec. 210.18a of this 
title.
    (ii) The ratio of the number of School Food Authorities 
participating in the National School Lunch or Commodity School Programs 
under the jurisdiction of the State agency to such School Food 
Authorities in all States times twenty (20) percent of the funds 
designated by FCS for reviews conducted under Sec. 210.18 or 
Sec. 210.18a of this title.
    (iii) The ratio of the number of free and reduced price meals served 
in School Food Authorities under the jurisdiction of the State agency 
during the second preceding fiscal year to the number of free and 
reduced price meals served in all States in the second preceding fiscal 
year times twenty (20) percent of the funds designated by FCS for 
reviews conducted under Sec. 210.18 or Sec. 210.18a of this title.
    (iv) Equal shares of twenty (20) percent of the funds designated by 
FCS for reviews conducted under Sec. 210.18 or Sec. 210.18a of this 
title for each School Food Authority under the jurisdiction of the State 
agency participating in the National School Lunch or Commodity School 
Programs which has an enrollment of 40,000 or more; Provided, however, 
That for State agencies with fewer than two School Food Authorities with 
enrollments of 40,000 or more, an equal share shall be provided to the 
State agency, for either, or both, of the two largest School Food 
Authorities which have enrollments of more than 2,000; and Provided, 
further, That State agencies with only one School Food Authority, 
regardless of size, shall be provided with one equal share. For each 
fiscal year, the amount of State Administrative Expense Funds designated 
by FCS for reviews conducted under Sec. 210.18 or Sec. 210.18a of this 
title and subject to allocation under this paragraph shall be equal to 
or greater than the amount designated by FCS for program management 
improvements for the fiscal year ending September 30, 1980.
    (4) Funds which remain after the allocations required in paragraphs 
(a)(1), (a)(2), (b)(1), (b)(2) and (b)(3) of this section, and after any 
payments provided for under paragraph (c) of this section,

[[Page 236]]

as determined by the Secretary, to those States which administer the 
Food Distribution Program (part 250 of this chapter) in schools and/or 
institutions which participate in programs under parts 210, 220, or 226 
of this chapter and to those States which administer part 226 of this 
chapter. The amount of funds to be allocated to each State for the Food 
Distribution Program for any fiscal year shall bear the same ratio to 
the total amount of funds made available for allocation to the State for 
the Food Distribution Program under this paragraph as the value of USDA 
donated foods delivered to the State for schools and institutions 
participating in programs under parts 210, 220 and 226 of this chapter 
during the second preceding fiscal year bears to the value of USDA 
donated foods delivered to all the States for such schools and 
institutions during the second preceding fiscal year. The amount of 
funds to be allocated to each State which administers the Child and 
Adult Care Food Program for any fiscal year shall bear the same ratio to 
the total amount of funds made available for allocation to all such 
States under this paragraph as the amount of funds allocated to each 
State under paragraph (a)(2) of this section bears to the amount 
allocated to all States under that paragraph.
    (c) SAE Funds for the Child and Adult Care Food Program. If a State 
elects to have a separate State agency administer the adult care 
component of the Child and Adult Care Food Program, such separate State 
agency shall receive a pro rata share of the SAE funds allocated to the 
State under paragraphs (a)(2), (b)(1), and (b)(4) of this section which 
is equal to the ratio of funds expended by the State for the adult care 
component of the Child and Adult Care Food Program during the second 
preceding fiscal year to the funds expended by the State for the entire 
Child and Adult Care Food Program during the second preceding fiscal 
year. The remaining funds shall be allocated to the State agency 
administering the child care component of the Child and Adult Care Food 
Program.
    (d) SAE Start-up Cost Assistance for State Administration of Former 
ROAPs. For any State agency which agrees to assume responsibility for 
the administration of food service programs in nonprofit private schools 
or child and adult care institutions that were previously administered 
by FCS, an appropriate adjustment in the administrative funds paid under 
this part to the State shall be made by FCS not later than the 
succeeding fiscal year. Such an adjustment shall consist of an amount of 
start-up cost assistance, negotiated with the State agency, of no less 
than $10,000 and not exceeding $100,000, per State.
    (e) SAE Funding Reduction Upon State Agency Termination of a Food 
Service Program. For any State agency which terminates its 
administration of any food service program for which State 
administrative expense funds are provided under this part, a reduction 
in the amount of such funds, negotiated with the State agency, shall be 
made by FCS.
    (f) SAE Funds for ROAPs. FCS shall have available to it the 
applicable amounts provided for in paragraphs (a)(1), (a)(2), and (b)(1) 
of this section, and part 225 of this title, when it is responsible for 
the administration of a program or programs within a State.
    (g) Reallocation. Funds allotted to State agencies under this 
section shall be subject to the reallocation provisions of 
Sec. 235.5(d).

(Sec. 14, Pub. L. 95-166, 91 Stat. 1338 (42 U.S.C. 1776); sec. 7, Pub. 
L. 95-627, 92 Stat. 3621 (42 U.S.C. 1776); sec. 7(a), Pub. L. 95-627, 92 
Stat. 3622 (42 U.S.C. 1751); Pub. L. 96-499, secs. 201 and 204, 94 Stat. 
2599; secs. 805, 812, 814 and 819, Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 521-535 (42 
U.S.C. 1754, 1759a, 1774 and 1776); E.O. 12372 (July 14, 1982, 47 FR 
30959); sec. 401(b) Intergovernmental Cooperation Act of 1968 (31 U.S.C. 
6506(c))

[44 FR 48957, Aug. 21, 1979, as amended at 44 FR 51185, Aug. 31, 1979; 
44 FR 53489, Sept. 14, 1979; 45 FR 3566, Jan. 18, 1980; Amdt. 11, 48 FR 
27892, June 17, 1983; Amdt. 14, 51 FR 27151, July 30, 1986; Amdt. 15, 51 
FR 33862, Sept. 24, 1986; Amdt. 17, 55 FR 1378, Jan. 16, 1990; 56 FR 
32949, July 17, 1991; 58 FR 42489, Aug. 10, 1993; 60 FR 15462, Mar. 24, 
1995]


<R05>
Sec. 235.5  Payments to States.

    (a) Method of payment. FCS will specify the terms and conditions of 
the State agency's annual grant of SAE funds in conjunction with the 
grant

[[Page 237]]

award document and will make funds available for payment by means of a 
Letter of Credit issued in favor of the State agency. The total amount 
of a State agency's grant shall be equal to the sum of the amounts 
allocated to such agency under Sec. 235.4 plus or minus any adjustments 
resulting from the reallocation provisions under paragraph (d) of this 
section plus any transfers under Sec. 235.6(a) and/or Sec. 235.6(c) of 
this part. The amount of SAE funds made available for payment to a State 
agency in any fiscal year shall be determined by FCS upon approval of 
the State agency's administrative plan for the fiscal year under 
paragraph (b) of this section and any amendments to such plan under 
paragraph (c) of this section. Funds shall not be made available before 
the State agency's plan or amendment to such plan, as applicable, has 
been approved by FCS. However, if the plan has not been approved by 
October 1 of the fiscal year, FCS may advance SAE funds to the State 
agency, in amounts determined appropriate by FCS, pending approval of 
the plan.
    (b) Administrative plan. (1) Based on guidance provided by FCS, each 
State agency shall submit to FCS, by August 15 of each year, a plan for 
meeting its administrative responsibilities under the National School 
Lunch Program, School Breakfast Program, Special Milk Program, Child and 
Adult Care Food Program, and Food Distribution Program in schools and 
child and adult care institutions as applicable, for the upcoming fiscal 
year. If FCS determines that a State agency is unable to comply with a 
due date under this subparagraph, it may grant an extension to the State 
agency.
    (2) The State agency's plan shall include its staffing pattern for 
State level personnel; a budget for the forthcoming fiscal year showing 
projected amounts (combined SAE and State funds) by cost category; the 
total amount of budgeted funds to be provided from State sources; the 
total amount of budgeted funds to be provided under this part; the State 
agency's estimate of the total SAE carryover from the current fiscal 
year; the State agency's estimate of the total amount of budgeted funds 
(combined SAE and State funds) attributable to administration of the 
School Nutrition Programs (National School Lunch, School Breakfast and 
Special Milk Programs), Child and Adult Care Food Program, and/or Food 
Distribution Program in schools and child and adult care institutions 
and to each of the major activity areas of the State agency; and the 
State agency's estimate of the total Child and Adult Care Food Program 
two percent audit funds to be used for the forthcoming fiscal year. 
These activity areas shall be defined and described by the State agency 
in accordance with guidance issued by FCS and may include such 
activities as program monitoring, technical assistance, Federal 
reporting/claims processing, policy implementation, and allocation of 
foods to recipient agencies.
    (3) The basic guidance issued by FCS for preparation of the plan 
shall provide flexibility in reporting with a minimal amount of 
reporting burden for State agencies. Such guidance, however, may be 
expanded for individual State agencies in order to address specific 
administrative deficiencies which affect compliance with program 
requirements and which have been identified by FCS through management 
evaluations, audits or other means. Except in specific instances where 
determined necessary by FCS, State agencies shall not be required to 
maintain expenditure records by activity area or program. State agencies 
shall refer to Office of Management and Budget Circular A-87, Attachment 
B to establish cost categories. In accordance with Office of Management 
and Budget Circular A-102, Attachment F, State agency plans for the 
forthcoming fiscal year shall include not only the projected 
expenditures of State funds by the State agency (as required above), but 
also all projected expenditures of State funds by other divisions of the 
State that will be applied to the State funding requirement under 
Sec. 235.11(a) of this part.
    (4) FCS shall approve a State agency's plan, or any amendment to 
such plan under paragraph (c) of this section, if it determines that the 
plan or amendment is consistent with program administrative needs and 
SAE requirements under this part. In approving a State agency's 
administrative plan or

[[Page 238]]

amendment thereto, FCS shall determine the amount of SAE funds to be 
made available for payment to the State agency. For any fiscal year, 
this amount shall be based on the amount of SAE funds justified in the 
administrative plan as amended, but shall not exceed the total of the 
following: SAE funds allocated to the State agency under Sec. 235.4 of 
this part for the fiscal year, any SAE funds carried over from the prior 
fiscal year grant, any SAE funds transferred to the State agency by 
another State agency within the State under Sec. 235.6(a) and/or 
Sec. 235.6(c) of this part and any SAE funds reallocated to the State 
agency under paragraph (d) of this section.
    (5) To the extent practicable, State agencies shall implement their 
approved plans (as amended). FCS shall monitor State agency 
implementation of the plans through management evaluations, State agency 
reports submitted under this part, and through other available means.
    (c) Amendments to the administrative plan. A State agency may amend 
its administrative plan at any time during the fiscal year to justify 
the need for additional SAE funds up to the limit specified in paragraph 
(b) of this section. Any such amendment shall provide information in a 
format consistent with that provided in the State agency's plan under 
paragraph (b) of this section and must be approved by FCS before 
additional SAE funds are made available for payment to the State agency. 
In accordance with guidance provided by FCS, a State agency shall also 
amend its administrative plan to reflect other changes in funding or 
funding needs. An amendment of this type shall also provide information 
in a format consistent with that provided in the State agency's plan, 
but shall only require FCS approval if it results in a significant 
reduction in funding level or level of planned activity.
    (d) Reallocation of funds. Annually, between March 1 and May 1 on a 
date specified by FCS, of each year, each State agency shall submit to 
FCS a State Administrative Expense Funds Reallocation Report (FCS-525) 
on the use of SAE funds. At such time, a State agency may release to FCS 
any funds that have been allocated, reallocated or transferred to it 
under this part or may request additional funds in excess of its current 
grant level. Based on this information or on other available 
information, FCS shall reallocate, as it determines appropriate, any 
funds allocated to State agencies in the current fiscal year which will 
not be expended in the following fiscal year and any funds carried over 
from the prior fiscal year which will not be expended in the current 
fiscal year. Reallocated funds shall be made available for payment to a 
State agency upon approval by FCS of the State agency's plan under this 
section and an amendment to such plan which covers the reallocated 
funds. Notwithstanding any other provision of this part, a State agency 
may, at any time, release to FCS for reallocation any funds that have 
been allocated, reallocated or transferred to it under this part and are 
not needed to implement its approved plan under this section.
    (e) Return of funds. (1) In Fiscal Year 1991, up to 25 per cent of 
the SAE funds allocated to each State agency under Sec. 235.4 may remain 
available for obligation and expenditure in the second fiscal year of 
the grant. In subsequent fiscal years, up to 20 percent may remain 
available for obligation and expenditure in the second fiscal year. The 
maximum amount to remain available will be calculated at the time of the 
formula allocation by multiplying the appropriate percentage by each 
State agency's formula allocation as provided under Sec. 235.4(a) 
through (c). At the end of the first fiscal year, the amount subject to 
the retention limit is determined by subtracting the amount reported by 
the State agency as Total Federal share of outlays and unliquidated 
obligations on the fourth quarter Standard Form (SF) 269, Financial 
Status Report, from the total amount of SAE funds made available for 
that fiscal year (i.e., the formula allocation adjusted for any 
transfers or reallocations). However, funds provided under Sec. 235.4(d) 
are not subject to the retention limit. Any funds in excess of the 
amount that remains available to each State agency shall be returned to 
FCS.
    (2) At the end of the fiscal year following the fiscal year for 
which funds were allocated, each State agency shall

[[Page 239]]

return any funds made available which are unexpended.
    (3) Return of funds by the State agency shall be made as soon as 
practicable, but in any event, not later than 30 days following demand 
by FCS.

[Amdt. 14, 51 FR 27151, July 30, 1986, as amended by Amdt. 17, 55 FR 
1378, Jan. 16, 1990; 60 FR 15462, Mar. 24, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 235.6  Use of funds.

    (a) Funds allocated under this part and 7 CFR part 225 shall be used 
for State agency administrative costs incurred in connection with the 
programs governed by 7 CFR parts 210, 215, 220, 225, 226, and 250 of 
this title. Except as provided under Sec. 235.6(c), funds allocated 
under Sec. 235.4, paragraphs (a) and (b) and 7 CFR part 225 shall be 
used for the program(s) for which allocated, except that the State 
agency may transfer up to ten percent of the funds allocated for any 
such program(s) to other such program(s). Subject to the provisions of 
this paragraph, a State agency may also transfer SAE funds that are not 
needed to implement its approved plan Sec. 235.5(b) to another State 
agency within the State that is eligible to receive SAE funds under this 
part. Up to 25 per cent of funds allocated under Sec. 235.4(a) through 
(c) for Fiscal Year 1991 and up to 20 per cent of funds allocated in 
subsequent fiscal years to a State agency may, subject to the provisions 
of Sec. 235.5 of this part, remain available for obligation and 
expenditure by such State agency during the following fiscal year.
    (a-1) State administrative expense funds paid to any State may be 
used by State agencies to pay salaries, including employee benefits and 
travel expenses for administrative and supervisory personnel, for 
support services, for office equipment, and for staff development, 
particularly for monitoring and training of food service personnel at 
the local level in areas such as food purchasing and merchandizing. Such 
funds shall be used to employ additional personnel, as approved in the 
applicable State plan to supervise, improve management, and give 
technical assistance to school food authorities and to institutions in 
their initiation, expansion, and conduct of any programs for which the 
funds are made available. State agencies may also use these funds for 
their general administrative expenses in connection with any such 
programs, including travel and related expenses. Additional personnel or 
part-time personnel hired are expected to meet professional 
qualifications and to be paid at salary scales of positions of 
comparable difficulty and responsibility under the State agency. 
Personnel may be used on a staff year equivalent basis, thus permitting 
new personnel and existing staff to be cross-utilized for most effective 
and economical operation under existing and new programs.
    (a-2) State Administrative Expense Funds paid to any State agency 
under Sec. 235.4(b)(3) shall be available for reviews conducted under 
Sec. 210.18 or Sec. 210.18a of this title activities associated with 
carrying out actions to ensure adherence to the program performance 
standards.
    (b) State administrative expense funds shall be used consistent with 
the cost principles and constraints on allowable and unallowable costs 
and indirect cost rates as prescribed in Office of Management and Budget 
Circular A-87.
    (c) In addition to State Administrative Expense funds made available 
specifically for food distribution purposes under Sec. 235.4 (b)(2) and 
(b)(4), State Administrative Expense funds allocated under Sec. 235.4 
(a)(1), (a)(2), (b)(1), (b)(3), and (d), and under (b)(4) for the Child 
and Adult Care Food Program may be used to assist in the administration 
of the Food Distribution Program (7 CFR part 250) in schools and 
institutions which participate in programs governed by parts 210, 220, 
and 226 of this title when such Food Distribution Program is 
administered within the State agency and may also be used to pay 
administrative expenses of a distributing agency, when such agency is 
other than the State agency and is responsible for administering all or 
part of such Food Distribution Program.
    (d) FCS shall allocate, for the purpose of providing grants on an 
annual basis to public entities and private nonprofit organizations 
participating in projects under section 18(c) of the National School 
Lunch Act, not more than $4,000,000 in each of Fiscal Years

[[Page 240]]

1993 and 1994. Subject to the maximum allocation for such projects for 
each fiscal year, at the beginning of each of Fiscal Years 1993 and 
1994, FCS shall allocate, from funds available under Sec. 235.5(d) that 
have not otherwise been allocated to States, an amount equal to the 
estimates by FCS of the funds to be returned under paragraph (a) of this 
section, but not less than $1,000,000 in each fiscal year. To the extent 
that amounts returned to FCS are less than estimated or are insufficient 
to meet the needs of the projects, FCS may allocate amounts to meet the 
needs of the projects from funds available under this section that have 
not been otherwise allocated to States. FCS shall reallocate any of the 
excess funds above the minimum level in accordance with Sec. 235.5(d).
    (e) Where State Administrative Expense Funds are used to acquire 
personal property or services the provisions of Secs. 235.9 and 235.10 
must be observed.
    (f) Each State agency shall adequately safeguard all assets and 
assure that they are used solely for authorized purposes.
    (g) Whoever embezzles, willfully misapplies, steals, or obtains by 
fraud any funds, assets, or property provided under this part, whether 
received directly or indirectly from the Department, shall:
    (1) If such funds, assets, or property are of a value of $100 or 
more, be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned not more than five 
years or both; or
    (2) If such funds, assets, or property are of a value of less than 
$100, be fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than one year 
or both.
    (h) Whoever receives, conceals, or retains to his use or gain funds, 
assets, or property provided under this part, whether received directly 
or indirectly from the Department, knowing such funds, assets, or 
property have been embezzled, willfully misapplied, stolen, or obtained 
by fraud, shall be subject to the same penalties provided in paragraph 
(h) of this section.

(Sec. 14, Pub. L. 95-166, 91 Stat. 1338, 1339, 1340 (42 U.S.C. 1751, 
1753, 1759a, 1761, 1766, 1772-1775, 1776, 1786); sec. 7(a), Pub. L. 95-
627, 92 Stat. 3621, 3622 (42 U.S.C. 1751, 1776))

[41 FR 32405, Aug. 3, 1976, as amended at 43 FR 37172, Aug. 22, 1978; 44 
FR 37901, June 29, 1979; 44 FR 48958, Aug. 21, 1979; 44 FR 51185, Aug. 
31, 1979; 45 FR 3566, Jan. 18, 1980; Amdt. 11, 48 FR 27892, June 17, 
1983; Amdt. 14, 51 FR 27152, July 30, 1986; 56 FR 32949, July 17, 1991; 
60 FR 15462, Mar. 24, 1995; 60 FR 57148, Nov. 14, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 235.7  Records and reports.

    (a) Each State agency shall keep records on the expenditure of State 
administrative expense funds provided under this part and part 225 of 
this title. Such records shall conform with the applicable State plan 
for use of State administrative expense funds. The State agency shall 
make such records available, upon a reasonable request, to FCS, OIG, or 
the U.S. Comptroller General and shall maintain current accounting 
records of State administrative expense funds which shall adequately 
identify fund authorizations, obligations, unobligated balances, assets, 
liabilities, outlays and income. The records may be kept in their 
original form or on microfilm, and shall be retained for a period of 
three years after the date of the submission of the final Financial 
Status Report, subject to the exceptions noted below:
    (1) If audit findings have not been resolved, the records shall be 
retained beyond the three-year period as long as required for the 
resolution of the issues raised by the audit.
    (2) Records for nonexpendable property acquired with State 
Administrative Expense Funds shall be retained for three years after its 
final disposition.
    (b) Each State agency shall submit to FCS a quarterly Financial 
Status Report (SF-269) on the use of State administrative expense funds 
provided for

[[Page 241]]

each fiscal year under this part. Reports shall be postmarked and/or 
submitted to FCS no later than 30 days after the end of each quarter of 
the fiscal year and, in case of funds carried over under Sec. 235.6(a), 
each quarter of the following fiscal year until all such funds have been 
obligated and expended. Obligations shall be reported for the fiscal 
year in which they occur. Each State agency shall submit a final 
Financial Status Report for each fiscal year's State administrative 
expense funds. This report shall be postmarked and/or submitted to FCS 
no later than 30 days after the end of the fiscal year following the 
fiscal year for which the funds were initially made available. Based on 
guidance provided by FCS, each State agency shall also use the quarterly 
SF-269 to report on the use of State funds provided during the fiscal 
year. Each State agency shall also submit an annual report containing 
information on School Food Authorities under agreement with the State 
agency to participate in the National School Lunch or Commodity School 
programs.
    (c) State agencies operating those programs governed by parts 210, 
215, 220 and 226 and those State agencies which are distributing 
agencies eligible for SAE funds shall participate in surveys and studies 
of programs authorized under the National School Lunch Act, as amended, 
and the Child Nutrition Act of 1966, as amended, when such studies and 
surveys are authorized by the Secretary of Agriculture. The 
aforementioned State agencies shall encourage individual School Food 
Authorities, child and adult care institutions, and distributing 
agencies (as applicable) to participate in such studies and surveys. 
Distribution of State Administrative Expense funds to an individual 
State agency is contingent upon that State agency's cooperation in such 
studies and surveys.

(Sec. 14, Pub. L. 95-166, 91 Stat. 1338 (42 U.S.C. 1776); sec. 7, Pub. 
L. 95-627, 92 Stat. 3621 (42 U.S.C. 1776); 93 Stat. 837, Pub. L. 96-108 
(42 U.S.C. 1776); secs. 804, 816, 817 and 819, Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 
521-535 (42 U.S.C. 1753, 1756, 1759, 1771, 1773 and 1785); sec. 7(a), 
Pub. L. 95-627, 92 Stat. 3622, 42 U.S.C. 1751)

[41 FR 32405, Aug. 3, 1976, as amended at 43 FR 37173, Aug. 22, 1978; 44 
FR 48958, Aug. 21, 1979; 45 FR 8563, Feb. 8, 1980; Amdt. 9, 48 FR 195, 
Jan. 4, 1983; Amdt. 11, 48 FR 27892, June 17, 1983; Amdt. 12, 49 FR 
18989, May 4, 1984; Amdt. 14, 51 FR 27152, July 30, 1986; Amdt. 17, 55 
FR 1378, Jan. 16, 1990; 60 FR 15463, Mar. 24, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 235.8   Management evaluations and audits.

    (a) Each State agency shall provide for audits of State agency 
operations under this part to be made with reasonable frequency, but 
beginning in fiscal year 1978 once every two years. The audits shall 
determine the fiscal integrity of financial transactions and reports, 
and the compliance with applicable laws and regulations and with the 
administrative requirements set forth in 7 CFR part 3015. Audits may be 
made by State Auditors General, by State Controllers, or other 
comparable State audit groups, or by Certified Public Accountants or 
State licensed public accountants.
    (b) Each State agency shall develop a plan for the conduct of such 
audits which shall (1) provide a description of the State agency in 
adequate detail to demonstrate the independence of the audit 
organization, and (2) provide a systematic method to assure timely and 
appropriate resolution of audit findings and recommendations.
    (c) While OA shall rely to the fullest extent feasible upon State 
sponsored audits, it shall, whenever considered necessary, (1) perform 
on-site test audits, and (2) review audit reports and related working 
papers of audits performed by or for State agencies.
    (d) Use of audit guides available from OA is encouraged. When these 
guides

[[Page 242]]

are utilized, OA will coordinate its audits with State sponsored audits 
to form a network of intergovernmental audit systems.
    (e) Each State agency shall provide FCS with full opportunity to 
conduct management evaluations of all operations of the State agency 
under this part and shall provide OA with full opportunity to conduct 
audits of all such operations. Each State agency shall make available 
its records, including records of the receipt and expenditure of funds, 
upon a reasonable request by FCS, OA, or the U.S. Comptroller General.

(Sec. 7, Pub. L. 95-627, 92 Stat. 3621 (42 U.S.C. 1776); secs. 804, 805, 
812, 814, 816, 817 and 819, Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 521-535 (42 U.S.C. 
1753, 1754, 1756, 1759, 1759a, 1771, 1773, 1774, 1776, and 1785))

[41 FR 32405, Aug. 3, 1976, as amended at 44 FR 51186, Aug. 31, 1979; 
Amdt. 7, 47 FR 18567, Apr. 30, 1982; Amdt. 9, 48 FR 195, Jan. 4, 1983; 
54 FR 2991, Jan. 23, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 235.9  Procurement and property management standards.

    (a) Requirements. State agencies shall comply with the requirements 
of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-102 and the 
Department's Uniform Federal Assistance Regulations, 7 CFR part 3015, 
subpart S (46 FR 55658) concerning the procurement of supplies, 
equipment and other services with State Administrative Expense Funds. 
These requirements are adopted by FCS to ensure that such materials and 
services are obtained for the Program efficiently and economically and 
in compliance with applicable laws and executive orders.
    (b) Contractual responsibilities. The standards contained in OMB 
Circular A-102 and 7 CFR part 3015 do not relieve the State agency of 
any contractual responsibilities under its contract. The State agency is 
the responsible authority, without recourse to FCS, regarding the 
settlement and satisfaction of all contractual and administrative issues 
arising out of procurements entered into in connection with the Program. 
This includes, but is not limited to source evaluation, protests, 
disputes, claims, or other matters of a contractual nature. Matters 
concerning violation of law are to be referred to the local, State or 
Federal authority that has proper jurisdiction.
    (c) Procurement procedure. The State agency may use its own 
procurement procedures which reflect applicable State and local laws and 
regulations, provided that procurements made with Program funds adhere 
to the standards set forth in OMB Circular A-102 and 7 CFR part 3015.
    (d) Property acquired with State administrative expense funds. State 
Agencies shall comply with the requirements of OMB Circular A-102 and 7 
CFR part 3015, subpart R (46 FR 55654) in their utilization and 
disposition of property acquired in whole or in part with State 
Administrative Expense Funds.

(Pub. L. 79-396, 60 Stat. 231 (42 U.S.C. 1751); Pub. L. 89-642, 80 Stat. 
885-890 (42 U.S.C. 1773); Pub. L. 91-248, 84 Stat. 207 (42 U.S.C. 1759))

[Amdt. 9, 48 FR 19355, Apr. 29, 1983]
Sec. 235.10  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 235.11   Other provisions.

    (a) State funds. Expenditures of funds from State sources in any 
fiscal year for the administration of the National School Lunch Program, 
School Breakfast Program, Special Milk Program, Child and Adult Care 
Food Program shall not be less than that expended or obligated in fiscal 
year 1977. Failure of a State to maintain this level of funding will 
result in the total withdrawal of SAE funds. State agencies shall 
follow, as applicable, the provisions of Office of Management and Budget 
Circular A-102, Attachments F and G and 7 CFR part 3015, subparts G and 
H in identifying and documenting expenditures of funds from State 
revenues to meet the State funding requirement of this paragraph.
    (b) Sanctions imposed. (1) FCS may recover, withhold or cancel 
payment of up to one hundred (100) percent of the funds payable to a 
State agency under this part, whenever it is determined by FCS that the 
State agency has failed to comply with the requirements contained in 
this part and in parts 210, 215, 220 and 226 of this title and in part 
250 of this title as it applies to the operation of the Food 
Distribution Program in schools and child and adult care institutions.

[[Page 243]]

    (2) In addition to the general provisions found in paragraph (b)(1) 
of this section, FCS may, for any fiscal year, recover, withhold or 
cancel payment of up to thirty-three and one-third (33\1/3\) percent of 
the funds payable to, and to be used by, a State agency under 
Sec. 235.4(a)(1) and Sec. 235.4(b)(3) for administration of school 
nutrition programs in FCS determines that a State agency is deficient in 
one or more of the following:
    (i) Implementing the requirements in Sec. 210.18 or Sec. 210.18a of 
this title;
    (ii) Conducting the number of reviews required in Sec. 210.18 or 
Sec. 210.18a of this title within the timeframes specified;
    (iii) Covering the areas of review set forth in the Sec. 210.18 or 
Sec. 210.18a, carrying out corrective action, and assessing and 
recovering claims as prescribed in Sec. 210.18, Sec. 210.18a, and 
Sec. 210.19 of this title;
    (iv) Conducting reviews with sufficient thoroughness to identify 
violations of the areas of review identified in Sec. 210.18 or 
Sec. 210.18a of this title; and
    (v) Meeting the reporting deadlines prescribed for the forms (FCS-10 
and SF-269) required under Sec. 210.5(d) of this title.
    (3) Furthermore, FCS may for any fiscal year, recover, withhold or 
cancel payment of up to thirty-three and one-third (33\1/3\) percent of 
the funds payable to, and to be used by, a State agency under 
Sec. 235.4(a)(2), Sec. 235.4(b)(1) and Sec. 235.4(b)(4) for 
administration of the Child and Adult Care Food Program if FCS 
determines that a State agency is deficient in meeting the reporting 
deadlines prescribed for the forms (FCS-44 and SF-269) required under 
Sec. 226.7(d) of this title.
    (4) In establishing the amounts of funds to be recovered, withheld 
or cancelled under paragraph (b)(2) and (b)(3) of this section, FCS 
shall determine the current or projected rate of funds usage by the 
State agency for all funds subject to sanction, and after considering 
the severity and longevity of the cumulative deficiencies, shall apply 
an appropriate sanction percentage to the amount so determined. During 
the fiscal year under sanction, a State agency may not use funds not 
included in the determination of funds usage to replace sanctioned 
funds. The maximum sanction percentage that may be imposed against a 
State agency for failure within one or more of the five deficiency areas 
specified in paragraph (b)(2) of this section for any fiscal year shall 
be thirty-three and one-third (33\1/3\) percent of the funds payable 
under Sec. 235.4(a)(1) and Sec. 235.4(b)(3) for administration of school 
nutrition programs for such fiscal year.
    (5) Before carrying out any sanction against a State agency under 
this section, the following procedures shall be implemented:
    (i) FCS shall notify the Chief State School Officer or equivalent of 
the deficiencies found and of its intention to impose sanctions unless 
an acceptable corrective action plan is submitted and approved by FCS 
within 60 calendar days.
     (ii) The State agency shall develop a corrective action plan with 
specific timeframes to correct the deficiencies and/or prevent their 
future recurrence. The plan will include dates by which the State agency 
will accomplish such corrective action.
    (iii) FCS shall review the corrective action plan. If it is 
acceptable, FCS shall issue a letter to the Chief State School Officer 
or equivalent approving the corrective action plan, and detailing the 
technical assistance that is available to the State agency to correct 
the deficiencies. The letter shall advise the Chief State School Officer 
or equivalent of the specific sanctions to be imposed if the corrective 
action plan is not implemented within timeframes set forth in the 
approved plan.
    (iv) Upon advice from the State agency that corrective action has 
been taken, FCS shall assess such action and, if necessary, shall 
perform a follow-up review to determine if the noted deficiencies have 
been corrected. FCS shall then advise the State agency if the actions 
taken are in compliance with the corrective action plan or if additional 
corrective action is needed.
    (v) If an acceptable corrective action plan is not submitted and 
approved within 60 calendar days, or if corrective action is not 
completed within the time limits established in the corrective action 
plan, FCS may impose a sanction by assessing a claim against the State 
agency or taking action in

[[Page 244]]

accordance with 7 CFR part 3015, subpart L. FCS shall notify the Chief 
State School Officer or equivalent of any such action.
    (vi) If, subsequent to the imposition of any sanction, FCS 
determines that the noted deficiencies have been resolved and that the 
programs for which SAE funds were made available are being operated in 
an acceptable manner, FCS may return to the State agency or restore to 
the State agency's Letter of Credit (LOC) part or all of any sanctioned 
SAE funds.
    (6) In carrying out sanctions under this part for any fiscal year, 
FCS may reduce the amount of allocated SAE funds payable to a State 
agency in whole or in part during such fiscal year and during following 
fiscal years if necessary.
    (7) Any State agency which has a sanction imposed against it in 
accordance with this paragraph shall not be eligible to participate in 
any reallocation of SAE funds under Sec. 235.5(d) of this part during 
any fiscal year in which such sanction is being applied.
    (c) Termination for convenience. FCS and the State agency may 
terminate the State agency's participation under this part in whole, or 
in part, when both parties agree that continuation would not produce 
beneficial results commensurate with the further expenditure of funds. 
The two parties shall agree upon the termination conditions, including 
the effective date and, in the case of partial termination, the portion 
to be terminated. The State agency shall not incur new obligations for 
the terminated portion after the effective date, and shall cancel as 
many outstanding obligations as possible. FCS shall allow full credit to 
the State agency for the Federal share of the noncancellable 
obligations, properly incurred by the State agency prior to termination.
    (d) In taking any action under paragraphs (b) or (c) of this 
section, FCS and the State agency shall comply with the provisions of 
the Department's Uniform Federal Assistance Regulations, 7 CFR part 3015 
subpart N concerning grant suspension, termination and closeout 
procedures.
    (e) State requirements. Nothing contained in this part shall prevent 
a State agency from imposing additional operating requirements which are 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this part.
    (f) Administrative review process. When FCS asserts a sanction 
against a State agency under the provisions of paragraph (b) of this 
section, the State agency may appeal the case and be afforded a review 
by an FCS Administrative Review Officer of the record including any 
additional written submissions prepared by the State agency.
    (1) FCS shall provide a written notice and shall ensure the receipt 
of such notice when asserting a sanction against a State agency.
    (2) A State agency aggrieved by a sanction asserted against it may 
file a written request with the Director, Administrative Review Staff, 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Consumer Service, 3101 Park 
Center Drive, Alexandria, Va. 22302 for a review of the record. Such 
request must be postmarked within 30 calendar days of the date of 
delivery of the sanction notice and the envelope containing the request 
shall be prominently marked ``REQUEST FOR REVIEW.'' If the State agency 
does not request a review within 30 calendar days of the date of 
delivery of the sanction notice, the administrative decision on the 
sanction shall be final.
    (3) Upon receipt of a request for review, FCS shall promptly provide 
the State agency with a written acknowledgment of the request. The 
acknowledgment shall include the name and address of the FCS 
Administrative Review Officer reviewing the sanction. The acknowledgment 
shall also notify the State agency that any additional information in 
support of its position must be submitted within 30 calendar days of the 
receipt of the acknowledgment.
    (4) When a review is requested, the FCS Administrative Review 
Officer shall review all available information and shall make a final 
determination within 45 calendar days after receipt of the State 
agency's additional information. The final determination shall take 
effect upon delivery of the written notice of this final decision to the 
State agency.

[[Page 245]]

    (5) The final determination of the FCS Administrative Review Officer 
will be the Department's final decision in the case and will not be 
subject to reconsideration.

(Sec. 14, Pub. L. 95-166, 91 Stat. 1338 (42 U.S.C. 1776); sec. 7, Pub. 
L. 95-627, 92 Stat. 3621 (42 U.S.C. 1776); secs. 805 and 819, Pub. L. 
97-35, 95 Stat. 521-535 (42 U.S.C. 1773); sec. 7(a), Pub. L. 95-627, 93 
Stat. 3622, 42 U.S.C. 1751)

[41 FR 32405, Aug. 3, 1976, as amended at 44 FR 48958, Aug. 21, 1979; 
Amdt. 6, 47 FR 14135, Apr. 2, 1982; Amdt. 11, 48 FR 27892, June 17, 
1983; Amdt. 12, 49 FR 18989, May 4, 1984; Amdt. 14, 51 FR 27152, July 
30, 1986; Amdt. 15, 51 FR 33862, Sept. 24, 1986; Amdt. 17, 55 FR 1378, 
Jan. 16, 1990; 56 FR 32950, July 17, 1991; 60 FR 15463, Mar. 24, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 235.12  Information collection/recordkeeping--OMB assigned control numbers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Current OMB
       7 CFR section where requirements are described          control  
                                                                number  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
235.3(b)...................................................    0584-0327
235.4 (d), (e).............................................    0584-0319
235.7(a)...................................................    0584-0319
235.7(b)...................................................    0584-0341
235.7(c)...................................................    0584-0319
235.8 (a), (b).............................................    0584-0319
235.9 (c), (d).............................................    0584-0319
235.11(b)(2)...............................................    0584-0006
                                                               0584-0002
                                                               0584-0341
235.11(b)(5)(ii)...........................................    0584-0319
235.11(f)..................................................    0584-0319
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[50 FR 53258, Dec. 31, 1985]


<R03>
PART 240--CASH IN LIEU OF DONATED FOODS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
240.1  General purpose and scope.
240.2  Definitions.
240.3  Cash in lieu of donated foods for program schools.
240.4  Cash in lieu of donated foods for nonresidential child and adult 
          care institutions.
240.5  Cash in lieu of donated foods for commodity schools.
240.6  Funds for States which have phased out facilities.
240.7  Payments to States.
240.8  Payments to program schools, service institutions, nonresidential 
          child care institutions and commodity schools.
240.9  Use of funds.
240.10  Unobligated funds.
240.11  Records and reports.

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 612c note, 1751, 1755, 1762a, 1765, 1766, 1779.

    Source: 47 FR 15982, Apr. 13, 1982, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 240.1  General purpose and scope.

    (a) Each school year the Department programs agricultural 
commodities and other foods to States for delivery to program and 
commodity schools, nonresidential child care institutions, and service 
institutions pursuant to the regulations governing the donation of foods 
for use in the United States, its territories and possessions and areas 
under its jurisdiction (7 CFR part 250).
    (b) Section 6(b) of the Act requires that not later than June 1 of 
each school year, the Secretary shall make an estimate of the value of 
the agricultural commodities and other foods that will be delivered 
during that school year for use in lunch programs by schools 
participating in the National School Lunch Program (7 CFR part 210). If 
this estimate is less than the total level of assistance authorized 
under section 6(e) of the Act the Secretary shall pay to the State 
administering agency not later than July 1 of that school year, an 
amount of funds equal to the difference between the value of donated 
foods as then programmed for that school year and the total level of 
assistance authorized under such section.
    (c) Section 6(e)(1) of the Act requires:
    (1) That for each school year, the total commodity assistance, or 
cash in lieu thereof, available to each State for the National School 
Lunch Program shall be the amount obtained by multiplying the national 
average value of donated foods, described in paragraph (c)(2) of this 
section, by the number of lunches served in that State in the preceding 
school year; and
    (2) That the national average value of foods donated to schools 
participating in the National School Lunch Program, or cash payments 
made in lieu thereof, shall be 11 cents, adjusted on July 1, 1982, and 
each July 1 thereafter to reflect changes in the Price Index for Food 
Used in Schools and Institutions. Section 6(e)(1) further requires that 
not less than 75 percent of the assistance under that section shall be 
in the form

[[Page 246]]

of donated foods for the National School Lunch Program. After the end of 
each school year, FCS shall reconcile the number of lunches served by 
schools in each State with the number served in the preceding school 
year and, based on such reconciliation, shall increase or reduce 
subsequent commodity assistance or cash in lieu thereof provided to each 
State.
    (d) Section 12(g) of the Act provides that whoever embezzles, 
willfully misapplies, steals, or obtains by fraud any funds, assets, or 
property that are the subject of a grant or other form of assistance 
under this Act or the Child Nutrition Act of 1966, whether received 
directly or indirectly from the United States Department of Agriculture, 
or whoever receives, conceals, or retains such funds, assets, or 
property to his use or gain, knowing such funds, assets, or property 
have been embezzled, willfully misapplied, stolen, or obtained by fraud 
shall, if such funds, assets, or property are of the value of $100 or 
more, be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned not more than five 
years, or both, or, if such funds, assets, or property are of a value of 
less than $100, shall be fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned for 
not more than one year, or both.
    (e) Section 14(f) of the Act provides that the value of foods 
donated to States for use in commodity schools for any school year shall 
be the sum of the national average value of donated foods established 
under section 6(e) of the Act and the national average payment 
established under section 4 of the Act. Section 14(f) also provides that 
such schools shall be eligible to receive up to five cents of such value 
in cash for processing and handling expenses related to the use of the 
donated foods.
    (f) Sections 17(h)(1) (B) and (C) of the Act provide that the value 
of commodities, or cash in lieu thereof, donated to States for use in 
nonresidential child or adult care institutions participating in the 
Child and Adult Care Food Program (7 CFR part 226) for any school year 
shall be, at a minimum, the amount obtained by multiplying the number of 
lunches and suppers served during the preceding school year by the rate 
established for lunches for that school year under section 6(e) of the 
Act. At the end of each school year, FCS shall reconcile the number of 
lunches and suppers served in participating institutions in each State 
during such school year with the number of lunches and suppers served in 
the preceding school year and, based on such reconciliation, shall 
increase or reduce subsequent commodity assistance or cash in lieu of 
commodities provided to each State.
    (g) Section 16 of the Act provides that a State which has phased out 
its food distribution facilities prior to June 30, 1974, may elect to 
receive cash payments in lieu of donated foods for the purposes of the 
applicable child nutrition programs--i.e., the National School Lunch 
Program, the Summer Food Service Program for Children (7 CFR part 225) 
and the Child Care Food Program.
    (h) These regulations prescribe the methods for determination of the 
amount of payments, the manner of disbursement and the requirements for 
accountability for funds when these respective statutory authorities 
require the Department to make cash payments in lieu of donating 
agricultural commodities and other foods.

[47 FR 15982, Apr. 13, 1982, as amended at 52 FR 7267, Mar. 10, 1987; 58 
FR 39120, July 22, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 240.2  Definitions.

    For the purpose of this part the term:
    Act means the National School Lunch Act, as amended.
    Child Care Food Program means the Program authorized by section 17 
of the Act.
    Commodity school means a school that does not participate in the 
National School Lunch Program under part 210 of this chapter but which 
operates a nonprofit lunch program under agreement with the State 
educational agency or FCSRO and receives donated foods, or donated foods 
and cash or services of a value of up to 5 cents per lunch in lieu of 
donated foods under this part for processing and handling the foods.
    Department means the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
    Distributing agencies means State, Federal or private agencies which 
enter into agreements with the Department

[[Page 247]]

for the distribution of donated foods to program schools, commodity 
schools, and nonresidential child care institutions.
    Donated-food processing and handling expenses means any expenses 
incurred by or on behalf of a commodity school for processing or other 
aspects of the preparation, delivery, and storage of donated foods for 
use in its lunch program.
    Donated foods means foods donated, or available for donation, by the 
Department under any of the legislation referred to in part 250 of this 
chapter.
    Fiscal year means the period of 12 months beginning October 1 of any 
calendar year and ending September 30 of the following calendar year.
    FCS means the Food and Consumer Service of the Department.
    FCSRO means the appropriate Food and Consumer Service Regional 
Office.
    National School Lunch Program means the Program authorized by 
sections 4 and 11 of the Act.
    Nonprofit means exempt from income tax under section 501(c)(3) of 
the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended; or in the Commonwealth of 
Puerto Rico, certified as nonprofit by its Governor.
    Nonresidential child care institution means any child care center, 
day care home, or sponsoring organization (as those terms are defined in 
part 226 of this chapter) which participates in the Child Care Food 
Program.
    Program school means a school which participates in the National 
School Lunch Program.
    School means (1) an educational unit of high school grade or under 
except for a private school with an average yearly tuition exceeding 
$1,500 per child, operating under public or nonprofit private ownership 
in a single building or complex of buildings. The term ``high school 
grade or under'' includes classes of preprimary grade when they are 
conducted in a school having classes of primary or higher grade, or when 
they are recognized as a part of the educational system in the State, 
regardless of whether such preprimary grade classes are conducted in a 
school having classes of primary or higher grade; (2) with the exception 
of residential summer camps which participate in the Summer Food Service 
Program for Children, Job Corps centers funded by the Department of 
Labor and private foster homes, any public or nonprofit private child 
care institution, or distinct part of such institution, which (i) 
maintains children in residence, (ii) operates principally for the care 
of children, and (iii) if private, is licensed to provide residential 
child care services under the appropriate licensing code by the State or 
a subordinate level of government. The term ``child care institutions'' 
includes, but is not limited to: homes for the mentally retarded, the 
emotionally disturbed, the physically handicapped, and unmarried mothers 
and their infants; group homes; halfway houses; orphanages; temporary 
shelters for abused children and for runaway children; long-term care 
facilities for chronically ill children; and juvenile detention centers; 
and (3) with respect to the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, nonprofit child 
care centers certified as such by the Governor of Puerto Rico.
    School food authority means the governing body which is responsible 
for the administration of one or more schools and which has the legal 
authority to operate a nonprofit lunch program therein.
    School year means the period of 12 months beginning July 1 of any 
calendar year and ending June 30 of the following calendar year.
    Secretary means the Secretary of Agriculture.
    Service institutions means camps or sponsors (as those terms are 
defined in part 225 of this chapter) which participate in the Summer 
Food Service Program for Children.
    Special needs children means children who are emotionally, mentally 
or physically handicapped.
    State means any of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, the 
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American-Samoa, 
the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, or the Commonwealth of the 
Northern Mariana Islands.
    State agency means the State educational agency or such other agency 
of the State as has been designated by the Governor or other appropriate 
executive or legislative authority of the

[[Page 248]]

State and approved by the Department to administer, in the State, the 
National School Lunch Program, the Child Care Food Program, the Summer 
Food Service Program for Children, or nonprofit lunch programs in 
commodity schools.
    State educational agency means, as the State legislature may 
determine, (1) the chief State school officer (such as the State 
Superintendent of Public Instruction, Commissioner of Education, or 
similar officer), or (2) a board of education controlling the State 
Department of Education.
    Summer Food Service Program for Children means the Program 
authorized by section 13 of the Act.
    Tuition means any educational expense required by the school as part 
of the students' educational program; not including transportation fees 
for commuting to and from school, and the cost of room and board. The 
following monies shall not be included when calculating a school's 
average yearly tuition per child:
    (1) Academic scholarship aid from public or private organizations or 
entities given to students, or to schools for students, and (2) state, 
county or local funds provided to schools operating principally for the 
purpose of educating handicapped or other special needs children for 
whose education the State, county or local government is primarily or 
solely responsible. In a school which varies tuition, the average yearly 
tuition shall be calculated by dividing the total tuition receipts for 
the current school year by the total number of students enrolled for 
purposes of determining if the average yearly tuition exceeds $1,500 per 
child.


<R05>
Sec. 240.3  Cash in lieu of donated foods for program schools.

    (a) Not later than June 1 of each school year, FCS shall make an 
estimate of the value of agricultural commodities and other foods that 
will be delivered to States during the school year under the food 
distribution regulations (7 CFR part 250) for use in program schools. If 
the estimated value is less than the total value of assistance 
authorized under section 6(e) of the Act for the National School Lunch 
Program, FCS shall determine the difference between the value of the 
foods then programmed for each State for the school year and the 
required value and shall pay the difference to each State agency not 
later than July 1 of that school year.
    (b) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, in any 
State in which FCS administers the National School Lunch Program in any 
of the schools of the State, FCS shall withhold from the funds payable 
to that State under this section an amount equal to the ratio of the 
number of lunches served in schools in which the program is administered 
by FCS to the total number of lunches served in all program schools in 
the State.

[47 FR 15982, Apr. 13, 1982, as amended at 52 FR 7267, Mar. 10, 1987; 58 
FR 39120, July 22, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 240.4  Cash in lieu of donated foods for nonresidential child and adult care institutions.

    (a) For each school year any State agency may, upon application to 
FCS prior to the beginning of the school year, elect to receive cash in 
lieu of donated foods for use in nonresidential child care or adult care 
institutions participating in the Child and Adult Care Food Program. FCS 
shall pay each State agency making such election, at a minimum, an 
amount calculated by multiplying the number of lunches and suppers 
served in the State's nonresidential child and adult care institutions 
which meet the meal pattern requirements prescribed in the regulations 
for the Child and Adult Care Food Program under part 226 of this chapter 
by the national average value of donated food prescribed in section 
6(e)(1) of the Act. However, if a State agency has elected to receive a 
combination of donated foods and cash, the required amount shall be 
reduced based upon the number of such lunches and suppers served for 
which the State receives donated foods.
    (b) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section in any State 
in which FCS administers the Child Care Food Program in any 
nonresidential child care institution, FCS shall withhold from the funds 
payable to such State under this section an amount equal to the ratio of 
the number of

[[Page 249]]

lunches and suppers served in such institutions in which the program is 
administered by the FCS and for which cash payments are provided to the 
total number of lunches and suppers served in that program and for which 
cash in lieu of payments are received, in all nonresidential child care 
institutions in the State.

[47 FR 15982, Apr. 13, 1982, as amended at 58 FR 39120, July 22, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 240.5  Cash in lieu of donated foods for commodity schools.

    (a) The school food authority of a commodity school may elect (1) to 
receive cash payments in lieu of up to five cents per lunch of the value 
specified in Sec. 250.4(b)(2)(ii) of this chapter to be used for 
donated-food processing and handling expenses, or (2) to have such 
payments retained for use on its behalf by the State agency. The school 
food authority shall consult with commodity schools before making the 
election.
    (b) When a school food authority makes an election regarding receipt 
of cash payments and the amount of any payments to be received under 
this paragraph, such election shall be binding on the school food 
authority for the school year to which the election applies.
    (c) The State agency shall (1) no later than May 14, 1982 for the 
school year ending June 30, 1982, and no later than August 15 of each 
subsequent school year, contact all school food authorities of commodity 
schools to learn their election regarding cash payments under this 
section and the amount of any such payments, and (2) forward this 
information to the distributing agency and FCSRO, in accordance with 
Sec. 210.14(d)(2) of this chapter.


<R05>
Sec. 240.6  Funds for States which have phased out facilities.

    Notwithstanding any other provision of this part, any State which 
phased out its food distribution facilities prior to June 30, 1974, may, 
for purposes of the National School Lunch Program, the Summer Food 
Service Program for Children, and the Child Care Food Program, elect to 
receive cash payments in lieu of donated foods. Where such an election 
is made, FCS shall make cash payments to such State in an amount 
equivalent in value to the donated foods (or cash in lieu thereof) to 
which the State would otherwise have been entitled under section 6(e) of 
the Act, if it had retained its food distribution facilities, except 
that the amount may be based on the number of meals served in the 
current school year, rather than on the number of meals served in the 
preceding school year with a subsequent reconciliation.

[47 FR 15982, Apr. 13, 1982, as amended at 58 FR 39120, July 22, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 240.7  Payments to States.

    (a) Funds to be paid to any State agency under Sec. 240.3 of this 
part for disbursement to program schools shall be made available by 
means of United States Treasury Department checks. The State agency 
shall use the funds received without delay for the purpose for which 
issued.
    (b) Funds to be paid to any State agency under Sec. 240.4(a) for 
disbursement to nonresidential child care institutions and funds to be 
paid to any State agency under Sec. 240.6 for disbursement to program 
schools, service institutions, or nonresidential child care institutions 
shall be made available by means of Letters of Credit issued by FCS in 
favor of the State agency. The State agency shall:
    (1) Obtain funds needed to pay school food authorities, 
nonresidential child care institutions, and service institutions, as 
applicable through presentation by designated State Officials of a 
Payment Voucher on Letter of Credit (Treasury Form GFO 7578) in 
accordance with procedures prescribed by FCS and approved by the United 
States Treasury Department;
    (2) Submit requests for funds on a monthly basis in such amounts as 
necessary to make payments with respect to meals served the previous 
month;
    (3) Use the funds received without delay for the purpose for which 
drawn.
    (c) FCS shall make any cash payments elected under Sec. 240.5 of 
this part by increasing the amount of the Letter of Credit or, where 
applicable, of the Federal Treasury check, in accordance with the 
information provided under Sec. 240.5(c) of this part.
    (d) Funds received by State agencies pursuant to this part for 
disbursement

[[Page 250]]

to program schools and to commodity schools shall not be subject to the 
matching provisions of Sec. 210.6 of part 210 of this chapter.


<R05>
Sec. 240.8  Payments to program schools, service institutions, nonresidential child care institutions and commodity schools.

    (a) Each State agency shall promptly and equitably disburse any cash 
received in lieu of donated foods under this part to eligible program 
schools, service institutions and nonresidential child care 
institutions, as applicable. Funds withheld from States under Sec. 240.3 
and Sec. 240.4 shall be disbursed to eligible program schools, service 
institutions, and nonresidential child care institutions by FCSRO's in 
the same manner.
    (b) Unless the school food authority of a commodity school elects to 
have cash payments for donated-food processing and handling expenses 
retained for use on its behalf by the State agency, the State agency 
shall make such payments to the school food authority of such a school 
on a monthly basis in an amount equal to the number of lunches served 
(as reported in accordance with Sec. 210.13(a) of this chapter) times 
the value per lunch elected by the school food authority in accordance 
with Sec. 240.5 of this part. For the period November 11, 1981, through 
the close of the month in which this part is published in the Federal 
Register, a retroactive payment shall be made, where applicable, to the 
school food authority of a commodity school based on the number of 
lunches served during that period which meet the nutritional 
requirements specified in Sec. 210.10 of this chapter.


<R05>
Sec. 240.9  Use of funds.

    (a) Funds made available to school food authorities (for program 
schools), service institutions and nonresidential child care 
institutions under this part shall be used only to purchase United 
States agricultural commodities and other foods for use in their food 
service under the National School Lunch Program, Child Care Food 
Program, or Summer Food Service Program for Children, as applicable. 
Such foods shall be limited to those necessary to meet the requirements 
set forth in Sec. 210.10 of part 210 of this chapter, Sec. 225.10 of 
part 225 of this chapter and Sec. 226.10 of part 226 of this chapter, 
respectively. On or before disbursing funds to school food authorities 
(for program schools), service institutions and nonresidential child 
care institutions, State agencies and FCSRO's shall notify them of the 
reason for special disbursement, the purpose for which these funds may 
be used, and, if possible, the amount of funds they will receive.
    (b) Cash payments received under Sec. 240.5 of this part shall be 
used only to pay donated-food processing and handling expenses of 
commodity schools.
    (c) Funds provided under this part shall be subject to the 
Department's Uniform Federal Assistance Regulations (7 CFR part 3015).


<R05>
Sec. 240.10  Unobligated funds.

    State agencies shall release to FCS any funds paid to them under 
this part which are unobligated at the end of each fiscal year. Release 
of funds by any State agency shall be made as soon as practicable, but 
in any event, not later than 30 days following demand by FCS. Release of 
funds shall be reflected by a related adjustment in the State agency's 
Letter of Credit where appropriate or payment by State check where the 
funds have been paid by United States Treasury Department check.


<R05>
Sec. 240.11  Records and reports.

    (a) State agencies and distributing agencies shall maintain records 
and reports on the receipt and disbursement of funds made available 
under this part, and shall retain such records and reports for a period 
of three years after the end of the fiscal year to which they pertain, 
except that, if audit findings have not been resolved, the records shall 
be retained beyond the three-year period as long as required for the 
resolution of the issues raised by the audit.
    (b) State agencies shall establish controls and procedures which 
will assure that the funds made available under this part are not 
included in determining the State's matching requirements under 
Sec. 210.6 of part 210 of this chapter.


[[Page 251]]




<R03>
PART 245--DETERMINING ELIGIBILITY FOR FREE AND REDUCED PRICE MEALS AND FREE MILK IN SCHOOLS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
245.1  General purpose and scope.
245.2  Definitions.
245.3  Eligibility standards and criteria.
245.4  Exceptions for Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands.
245.5  Public announcement of the eligibility criteria.
245.6  Application for free and reduced price meals and free milk.
245.6a  Verification requirements.
245.7  Hearing procedure for families and School Food Authorities.
245.8  Nondiscrimination practices for children eligible to receive free 
          and reduced price meals and free milk.
245.9  Special assistance certification and reimbursement alternatives.
245.10  Action by School Food Authorities.
245.11  Action by State agencies and FCSROs.
245.12  Fraud penalties.
245.13  Special responsibilities of State agencies.
245.14  Information collection/recordkeeping--OMB assigned control 
          numbers.

    Authority: Secs. 3, 4, and 10 of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966, 80 
Stat. 885, 886, 889, as amended (42 U.S.C. 1772, 1773, 1779); secs. 2-
12, 60 Stat. 230, as amended (42 U.S.C. 1751-60).


<R05>
Sec. 245.1  General purpose and scope.

    (a) This part established the responsibilities of State agencies, 
Food and Consumer Service Regional Offices (where applicable), and 
School Food Authorities in providing free and reduced price meals and 
free milk in the National School Lunch Program (7 CFR part 210), the 
School Breakfast Program (7 CFR part 220), the Special Milk Program for 
Children (7 CFR part 215), and commodity schools. Section 9 of the 
National School Lunch Act, as amended, and sections 3 and 4 of the Child 
Nutrition Act of 1966, as amended, require schools participating in any 
of the programs and commodity schools to make available, as applicable, 
free and reduced price lunches, breakfasts, and at the option of the 
School Food Authority for schools participating only in the Special Milk 
Program free milk to eligible children.
    (b) This part sets forth the responsibilities under these Acts of 
State agencies, the Food and Consumer Service Regional Offices, and 
School Food Authorities with respect to the establishment of income 
guidelines, determination of eligibility of children for free and 
reduced price meals, and for free milk and assurance that there is no 
physical segregation of, or other discrimination against, or overt 
identification of children unable to pay the full price for meals or 
milk.

(Sec. 803, Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 521-535 (42 U.S.C. 1758))

[Amdt. 6, 39 FR 30337, Aug. 22, 1974, as amended by Amdt. 10, 41 FR 
28783, July 13, 1976; 47 FR 31852, July 23, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 245.2  Definitions.

    (a) Adult means any individual 21 years of age or older.
    (a-1) AFDC Assistance Unit means any individual or group of 
individuals which is currently certified to receive assistance under the 
Aid to Families with Dependent Children Program in a State where the 
standard of eligibility for AFDC benefits does not exceed the income 
eligibility guidelines for free meals or free milk under this part.
    (a-2) Commodity school means a school which does not participate in 
the National School Lunch Program under part 210 of this chapter, but 
which enters into an agreement as provided in Sec. 210.15a(b) to receive 
commodities donated under part 250 of this chapter for a nonprofit lunch 
program.
    (a-3) Current income means income, as defined in Sec. 245.6(a), 
received during the month prior to application. If such income does not 
accurately reflect the household's annual rate of income, income shall 
be based on the projected annual household income. If the prior year's 
income provides an accurate reflection of the household's current annual 
income, the prior year may be used as a base for the projected annual 
rate of income.
    (a-4) Documentation means the completion of the following 
information on a free and reduced price application:
    (1) names of all household members;
    (2) income received by each household member, identified by source 
of the income (such as earnings, wages, welfare, pensions, support 
payments, unemployment compensation, and social security and other cash 
income);

[[Page 252]]

    (3) the signature of an adult household member; and
    (4) the social security number of the adult household member who 
signs the application or an indication that he/she does not possess a 
social security number.

Alternatively, ``documentation'' for a child who is a member of a food 
stamp household or an AFDC assistance unit means completion of only the 
following information on a free and reduced price application: the name 
and appropriate food stamp or AFDC case number for the child and the 
name and signature of an adult member of the household.
    (b) Family means a group of related or nonrelated individuals, who 
are not residents of an institution or boarding house, but who are 
living as one economic unit.
    (b-1) Food Stamp Household means any individual or group of 
individuals which is currently certified to receive assistance as a 
household under the Food Stamp Program.
    (c) FCSRO where applicable means the appropriate Food and Consumer 
Service Regional Office when that agency administers the National School 
Lunch Program, School Breakfast Program or Special Milk Program with 
respect to nonprofit private schools.
    (d) Free meal means a meal for which neither the child nor any 
member of his family pays or is required to work in the school or in the 
school's food service.
    (d-1) Free milk means milk served under the regulations governing 
the Special Milk Program and for which neither the child nor any member 
of his family pays or is required to work in the school or in the 
school's food service.
    (d-2) Household means ``family'' as defined in Sec. 245.2(b).
    (e) Income eligibility guidelines means the family-size income 
levels prescribed annually by the Secretary for use by States in 
establishing eligibility for free and reduced price meals and for free 
milk.
    (f) Meal means a lunch or meal supplement or a breakfast which meets 
the applicable requirements prescribed in Secs. 210.10, 210.15a, and 
220.8 of this chapter.
    (f-1) Milk means pasteurized fluid types of unflavored or flavored 
whole milk, lowfat milk, skim milk, or cultured buttermilk which meet 
State and local standards for such milk except that, in the meal pattern 
for infants (0 to 1 year of age) milk means unflavored types of whole 
fluid milk or an equivalent quantity of reconstituted evaporated milk 
which meet such standards. In Alaska, Hawaii, American Samoa, Guam, 
Puerto Rico, the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, and the Virgin 
Islands, if a sufficient supply of such types of fluid milk cannot be 
obtained, ``milk'' shall include reconstituted or recombined milk. All 
milk should contain vitamins A and D at levels specified by the Food and 
Drug Administration and consistent with State and local standards for 
such milk.
    (g) Reduced price meal means a meal which meets all of the following 
criteria: (1) The price shall be less than the full price of the meal; 
(2) the price shall not exceed 40 cents for a lunch and 30 cents for a 
breakfast; and (3) neither the child nor any member of his family shall 
be required to supply an equivalent value in work for the school or the 
school's food service.
    (h) Service institution shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 
part 225 of this chapter.
    (i) School, school food authority, and other terms and abbreviations 
used in this part shall have the meanings ascribed to them in part 210 
of this chapter.
    (j) Special Assistance Certification and Reimbursement Alternatives 
means the two optional alternatives for free and reduced price meal 
application and claiming procedures in the National School Lunch Program 
and School Breakfast Program which are available to those School Food 
Authorities with schools in which at least 80 percent of the enrolled 
children are eligible for free or reduced price meals, or schools which 
are currently, or who will be serving all children free meals.
    (k) Verification means confirmation of eligibility for free or 
reduced price benefits under the National School Lunch Program or School 
Breakfast Program. Verification shall include confirmation of income 
eligibility and,

[[Page 253]]

at State or local discretion, may also include confirmation of any other 
information required in the application which is defined as 
documentation in Sec. 245.2(a-4). Such verification may be accomplished 
by examining information provided by the household such as wage stubs, 
or by other means as specified in Sec. 245.6a(b). However, if a food 
stamp or AFDC case number is provided for a child, verification for such 
child shall only include confirmation that the child is included in a 
currently certified food stamp household or AFDC assistance unit.

(Secs. 801, 803, 812; Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 521-535 (42 U.S.C. 1753, 
1759(a), 1773, 1758))

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 245.2, 
see the List of CFR Sections Affected appearing in the Finding Aids 
section of this volume.


<R05>
Sec. 245.3   Eligibility standards and criteria.

    (a) Each State agency, or FCSRO where applicable, shall by July 1 of 
each year announce family-size income standards to be used by School 
Food Authorities of schools under the jurisdiction of such State agency, 
or FCSRO where applicable, in making eligibility determinations for free 
or reduced price meals and for free milk. Such family size income 
standards for free and reduced price meals and for free milk shall be in 
accordance with Income Eligibility Guidelines published by the 
Department by notice in the Federal Register.
    (b) Each School Food Authority shall establish eligibility criteria 
for free and reduced price meals and for free milk in conformity with 
the family-size income standards prescribed by the State agency, or 
FCSRO where applicable, under paragraph (a) of this section. Such 
criteria shall:
    (1) For all schools under the jurisdiction of the School Food 
Authority, specify the uniform family-size income criteria to be used 
for determining eligibility for free and reduced price meals in schools 
participating in the National School Lunch or School Breakfast Programs 
and in commodity-only schools, and for determining eligibility for free 
milk when the School Food Authority has chosen to serve free milk in its 
schools participating in the Special Milk Program; and
    (2) Provide that all children from a family meeting family-size 
income criteria and attending any school under the jurisdiction of the 
School Food Authority which participates under the National School Lunch 
Program, School Breakfast Program, Special Milk Program, or is a 
commodity only school shall be provided the same benefits. The School 
Food Authority's eligibility criteria shall be a part of the policy 
statement required under Sec. 245.10 and shall be publicly announced in 
accordance with the provisions of Sec. 245.5.
    (c) Each School Food Authority shall serve free and reduced price 
meals or free milk in the respective programs to children eligible under 
its eligibility criteria. When a child is not a member of a family as 
defined in Sec. 245.2(b), the child shall be considered a family of one. 
In any school which participates in more than one of the child nutrition 
programs, eligibility shall be applied uniformly so that eligible 
children receive the same benefits in each program. If a child transfers 
from one school to another school under the jurisdiction of the same 
School Food Authority, his eligibility for free or reduced price meals 
or for free milk, if previously established, shall be transferred to, 
and honored by, the receiving school if it participates in the National 
School Lunch Program, School Breakfast Program, Special Milk Program and 
the School Food Authority has elected to provide free milk, or is a 
commodity-only school.

(Sec. 8, Pub. L. 95-627, 92 Stat. 3623 (42 U.S.C. 1758); sec. 5, Pub. L. 
95-627, 92 Stat. 3619 (42 U.S.C. 1772); 42 U.S.C. 1785, 1766, 1772, 
1773(e), sec. 203, Pub. L. 96-499, 94 Stat. 2599; secs. 807 and 808, 
Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 521-535, 42 U.S.C. 1772, 1784, 1760; sec. 803, 
Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 521-535 (42 U.S.C. 1758))

[Amdt. 8, 40 FR 57207, Dec. 8, 1975; 40 FR 58281, Dec. 16, 1975, as 
amended by Amdt. 10, 41 FR 28783, July 13, 1976; Amdt. 13, 44 FR 33049, 
June 8, 1979; 47 FR 31852, July 23, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 245.4  Exceptions for Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands.

    Because the State agencies of Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands 
provide free meals or milk to all children in schools under their 
jurisdiction, regardless of the economic need of the

[[Page 254]]

child's family, they are not required to make individual eligibility 
determinations or publicly announce eligibility criteria. Instead, such 
State agencies may use a statistical survey to determine the number of 
children eligible for free or reduced price meals and milk on which a 
percentage factor for the withdrawal of special cash assistance funds 
will be developed subject to the following conditions:
    (a) State agencies shall conduct a statistical survey once every 
three years in accordance with the standards provided by FCS;
    (b) State agencies shall submit the survey design to FCS for 
approval before proceeding with the survey;
    (c) State agencies shall conduct the survey and develop the factor 
for withdrawal between July 1 and December 31 of the first school year 
of the three-year period;
    (d) State agencies shall submit the results of the survey and the 
factor for fund withdrawal to FCS for approval before any reimbursement 
may be received under that factor;
    (e) State agencies shall keep all material relating to the conduct 
of the survey and determination of the factor for fund withdrawal in 
accordance with the record retention requirements in Sec. 210.8(e)(14) 
of this chapter;
    (f) Until the results of the triennial statistical survey are 
available, the factor for fund withdrawal will be based on the most 
recently established percentages. The Department shall make retroactive 
adjustments to the States' Letter of Credit, if appropriate, for the 
year of the survey;
    (g) If any school in these States wishes to charge a student for 
meals, the State agency, School Food Authority and school shall comply 
with all the applicable provisions of this part and parts 210, 215 and 
220 of this chapter.

(Sec. 9, Pub. L. 95-166, 91 Stat 1336 (42 U.S.C. 1759a); secs. 807 and 
808, Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 521-535, 42 U.S.C. 1772, 1784, 1760; 44 
U.S.C. 3506)

[Amdt. 18, 45 FR 52771, Aug. 8, 1980, as amended at 46 FR 51366, Oct. 
20, 1981; 47 FR 746, Jan. 7, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 245.5   Public announcement of the eligibility criteria.

    (a) After the State agency, or FCSRO where applicable, notifies the 
School Food Authority that its criteria for determining the eligibility 
of children for free and reduced price meals and for free milk have been 
approved, the School Food Authority shall publicly announce such 
criteria: Provided however, That no such public announcement shall be 
required for boarding schools, schools as defined in Sec. 210.2(o)(2) of 
part 210 of this chapter, or a school which includes food service fees 
in its tuition, where all attending children are provided the same meals 
or milk. Such announcements shall be made at the beginning of each 
school year or, if notice of approval is given thereafter, within 10 
days after the notice is received. The public announcement of such 
criteria, as a minimum, shall include the following:
    (1) A letter or notice distributed on or about the beginning of each 
school year, to the parents of children in attendance at school. The 
letter or notice shall contain the following information:
    (i) In schools participating in a meal service program, the 
eligibility criteria for reduced price benefits with an explanation that 
households with incomes less than or equal to the reduced price criteria 
would be eligible for either free or reduced price meals, or in schools 
participating in the free milk option, the eligibility criteria for free 
milk benefits;
    (ii) How a household may make application for free or reduced price 
meals or for free milk for its children;
    (iii) An explanation that an application for free or reduced price 
benefits cannot be approved unless it contains complete 
``documentation'' as defined in Sec. 245.2(a-4);
    (iv) An explanation that households with children who are members of 
currently certified food stamp households or AFDC assistance units may 
submit applications for such children with the abbreviated information 
described in Sec. 245.2(a-4);
    (v) An explanation that the information on the application may be 
verified at any time during the school year;

[[Page 255]]

    (vi) An explanation that households receiving free or reduced price 
benefits must notify school officials during the school year of any 
decreases in household size and any increases in income of over $50 per 
month or $600 per year (or a lesser amount if established by the State) 
or, in the case of households that provided a food stamp or AFDC case 
number to establish eligibility for free meals or milk for a child, of 
any termination of certification for receipt of benefits for such 
children under the Food Stamp or AFDC Programs;
    (vii) How a household may apply for benefits at any time during the 
school year as circumstances change;
    (viii) A statement to the effect that children having parents or 
guardians who become unemployed are eligible for free or reduced price 
meals or for free milk during the period of unemployment, Provided, that 
the loss of income causes the household income during the period of 
unemployment to be within the eligibility criteria;
    (ix) A statement to the effect that in certain cases foster children 
are eligible for free or reduced price meals or free milk regardless of 
the income of the household with whom they reside and that households 
wishing to apply for such benefits for foster children should contact 
the School Food Authority;
    (x) The statement: ``In the operation of child feeding programs, no 
child will be discriminated against because of race, sex, color, 
national origin, age or handicap;'' and
    (xi) How a household may appeal the decision of the School Food 
Authority with respect to the application under the hearing procedure 
set forth in Sec. 245.7. The letter or notice shall be accompanied by a 
copy of the application form required under Sec. 245.6.
    (2) On or about the beginning of each school year, a public release, 
containing the same information supplied to parents, and including both 
free and reduced price eligibility criteria shall be provided to the 
informational media, the local unemployment office, and to any major 
employers contemplating large layoffs in the area from which the school 
draws its attendance.
    (b) Copies of the public release shall be made available upon 
request to any interested persons. Any subsequent changes in a school's 
eligibility criteria during the school year shall be publicly announced 
in the same manner as the original criteria were announced.

(Sec. 803, Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 521-535 (42 U.S.C. 1758); Pub. L. 79-
396, 60 Stat. 231 (42 U.S.C. 1751); Pub. L. 89-642, 80 Stat. 885-880 (42 
U.S.C. 1773); Pub. L. 91-248, 84 Stat. 207 (42 U.S.C. 1759))

[Amdt. 8, 40 FR 57207, Dec. 8, 1975, as amended by Amdt. 10, 41 FR 
28783, July 13, 1976; 47 FR 31852, 31853, July 23, 1982; Amdt. 24, 48 FR 
19355, Apr. 29, 1983; 49 FR 26034, June 26, 1984; 52 FR 19275, May 22, 
1987]


<R05>
Sec. 245.6   Application for free and reduced price meals and free milk.

    (a) Each School Food Authority of a school participating in the 
National School Lunch Program, School Breakfast Program or Special Milk 
Program or of a commodity only school shall provide supplies of a form 
for use by families in making application for free or reduced price 
meals or free milk for their children. The application shall be clear 
and simple in design and the information requested thereon shall be 
limited to that required to demonstrate that the family does, or does 
not, meet the eligibility criteria for free or reduced price meals, 
respectively, or for free milk, issued by the School Food Authority. The 
information requested on the application with respect to the current 
income of the household shall be limited to the income received by each 
member identified by the household member who received the income, and 
the source of the income (such as earnings, wages, welfare, pensions, 
support payments, unemployment compensation, social security and other 
cash income). Other cash income includes cash amounts received or 
withdrawn from any source, including savings, investments, trust 
accounts, and other resources which are available for payment of the 
price of a child's meals or milk. Additionally, the application shall 
require applicants to provide the names of all household members and the 
social security number of the adult household member who signs the 
application. In lieu of a social security number, the household may 
indicate the adult

[[Page 256]]

household member who signs the application does not possess a social 
security number. However, if application is being made for a child who 
is a member of a food stamp household or an AFDC assistance unit, the 
application shall enable the household to provide the appropriate food 
stamp or AFDC case number in lieu of names of all household members, 
household income information and social security number. The application 
shall also contain substantially the following statements:
    (1) Section 9 of the National School Lunch Act requires that, unless 
your child's food stamp or AFDC case number is provided, you must 
include the social security number of the adult household member signing 
the application or indicate that the household member signing the 
application does not have social security number. Provision of a social 
security number is not mandatory, but if a social security number is not 
given or an indication is not made that the signer does not have such a 
number, the application cannot be approved. The social security number 
may be used to identify the household member in carrying out efforts to 
verify the correctness of information stated on the application. These 
verification efforts may be carried out through program reviews, audits, 
and investigations and may include contacting employers to determine 
income, contacting a food stamp or welfare office to determine current 
certification for receipt of food stamps or AFDC benefits, contacting 
the State employment security office to determine the amount of benefits 
received and checking the documentation produced by household members to 
prove the amount of income received. These efforts may result in a loss 
or reduction of benefits, administrative claims or legal actions if 
incorrect information is reported.'' State agencies and School Food 
Authorities shall ensure that the notice complies with section 7 of Pub. 
L. 93-579 (Privacy Act of 1974); and
    (2) ``In certain cases foster children are eligible for free or 
reduced price meals or free milk regardless of your household income. If 
you have such children living with you and wish to apply for such meals 
or milk for them, please contact us.'' The application shall also 
include a statement, immediately above the space for signature, that the 
person signing the application certifies that all information furnished 
in the application is true and correct, that the application is being 
made in connection with the receipt of Federal funds, that school 
officials may verify the information on the application, and that 
deliberate misrepresentation of the information may subject the 
applicant to prosecution under applicable State and Federal criminal 
statutes. The application shall be signed by an adult member of the 
family. The application shall contain clear instructions with respect to 
the submission of the completed application to the official or officials 
designated by the School Food Authority to make eligibility 
determinations on its behalf. A family shall be permitted to file an 
application at any time during the school year.
    (b) Determination of eligibility. Prior to the processing of 
applications for the current school year, children from households with 
approved applications on file from the preceding year may be served 
reimbursable free and reduced price meals or free milk. However, 
applications from the preceding year may be used to determine 
eligibility only during the 30 operating days following the first 
operating day at the beginning of the school year, or during a timeframe 
established by the State agency, provided that any State agency 
timeframe does not exceed the 30 operating day limit. School officials 
shall take the income information provided by the household on the 
application and calculate the household's total current income. When a 
completed application furnished by a family indicates that the family 
meets the eligibility criteria for free and reduced price meals or free 
milk, the family shall be promptly notified and the children from that 
family shall be provided the benefits to which they are entitled.
    (1) Notice of denial. When the application furnished by the family 
is not fully documented or does not meet the eligibility criteria for 
free or reduced price benefits, school officials shall promptly provide 
written notice to each family denied benefits. As a minimum, this notice 
shall include:

[[Page 257]]

    (i) The reason for the denial of benefits, e.g. income in excess of 
allowable limits or incomplete application; (ii) notification of the 
right to appeal; (iii) instructions on how to appeal; and (iv) a 
statement reminding parents that they may reapply for free and reduced 
price benefits at any time during the school year. The reasons for 
ineligibility shall be properly documented and retained on file at the 
School Food Authority.
    (2) Appeals of denied benefits. A family who wishes to appeal a 
denied application by the School Food Authority may do so as specified 
in Sec. 245.7. However, prior to initiating the hearing procedure, the 
parent may request a conference to provide the opportunity for the 
parent and school officials to discuss the situation, present 
information, and obtain an explanation of the data submitted in the 
application or the decision rendered. The request for a conference shall 
not in any way prejudice or diminish the right to a fair hearing. The 
School Food Authority shall promptly schedule a fair hearing, if 
requested.
    (c) After the letter to parents and the applications have been 
disseminated, the School Food Authority may determine, based on 
information available to it, that a child for whom an application has 
not been submitted meets the School Food Authority's eligibility 
criteria for free and reduced price meals or for free milk. In such a 
situation, the School Food Authority shall complete and file an 
application for such child setting forth the basis of determining the 
child's eligibility. When a School Food Authority has obtained a 
determination of individual family income and family-size data from 
other sources, it need not require the submission of an application for 
any child from a family whose income would qualify for free or reduced 
price meals or for free milk under the School Food Authority's 
established criteria. In such event, the School Food Authority shall 
notify the family that its children are eligible for free or reduced 
price meals or for free milk. Nothing in this paragraph shall be deemed 
to provide authority for the School Food Authority to make eligibility 
determinations or certifications by categories or groups of children.

(Sec. 803, Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 521-535 (42 U.S.C. 1758))

[35 FR 14065, Sept. 4, 1970, as amended at 38 FR 14957, June 7, 1973; 
Amdt. 6, 39 FR 30338, Aug. 22, 1974; Amdt. 9, 41 FR 26192, June 25, 
1976; Amdt. 19, 45 FR 67287, Oct. 10, 1980; 47 FR 31853, July 23, 1982; 
49 FR 26034, June 26, 1984; 52 FR 19275, May 22, 1987; 55 FR 19240, May 
9, 1990; 56 FR 32950, July 17, 1991; 56 FR 33860, July 24, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 245.6a  Verification requirements.

    (a) Verification requirement. School officials may seek verification 
of the information on the application. State agencies shall ensure that 
by December 15 of each School Year, School Food Authorities have 
selected and verified a sample of their approved free and reduced price 
applications in accordance with the conditions and procedures described 
in this section. Verification activity may begin at the start of the 
school year but the final required sample size shall be based on the 
number of approved applications on file as of October 31. Any extensions 
to these deadlines must be approved in writing by FCS. School Food 
Authorities are required to satisfy the verification requirement by 
using either random sampling or focused sampling as described below. 
Random sampling consists of verifying a minimum of the lesser of 3 
percent or 3,000 applications which are selected by the School Food 
Authority. Focused sampling consists of selecting and verifying a 
minimum of: the lesser of 1 percent or 1,000 of total applications 
selected from non-food stamp households claiming monthly income within 
$100 or yearly income within $1200 of the income eligibility limit for 
free or reduced price meals; plus the lesser of one half of 1 percent 
(.5%) or 500 applications of food stamp households that provided food 
stamp case numbers in lieu of income information. A State may require 
all School Food Authorities to perform either random or focused 
sampling. School Food Authorities may choose to verify up to 100 percent 
of all applications to improve program integrity. Any State may, with 
the written approval of FCS, assume responsibility for complying with 
the verification requirements of this

[[Page 258]]

part within any of its School Food Authorities. When assuming such 
responsibility, States may utilize alternate approaches to verification 
provided that such verification meets the requirements of this part.
    (1) Confirmation of income information. Verification efforts shall 
not delay the approval of applications. An application must be approved 
if it contains the essential information specified in Sec. 245.2(a-4) 
and, if applicable, the household meets the income eligibility criteria 
for free or reduced price benefits. When written evidence or collateral 
contacts are the primary sources of information, the School Food 
Authority shall require the submission of income information for the 
most recent full month that is available. However, when using a system 
of records, the School Food Authority may choose a recent month to 
verify and the entire sample may be verified for the same month. 
Households which dispute the validity of income information acquired 
through systems of records shall be given the opportunity to produce 
more recent income information.
    (2) Notification of selection. Households selected to provide 
verification shall be provided written notice that their applications 
have been selected for verification and that they are required, by such 
date as determined by the school food authority, to submit the requested 
verification information to confirm eligibility for free or reduced 
price meals. These households shall be advised of the type or types of 
information and/or documents acceptable to the school. This information 
must include a social security number for each adult household member or 
an indication that such member does not have one. School food 
authorities shall inform selected households that:
    (i) Section 9 of the National School Lunch Act requires that unless 
the child's food stamp or AFDC case number is provided, households 
selected for verification must provide the social security number of 
each adult household member;
    (ii) In lieu of providing a social security number, an adult 
household member may indicate that he/she does not possess one;
    (iii) Provision of a social security number is not mandatory but if 
a social security number is not provided for each adult household member 
or an indication is not made that he/she does not possess one, benefits 
will be terminated;
    (iv) The social security numbers may be used to identify household 
members in carrying out efforts to verify the correctness of information 
stated on the application and continued eligibility for the program. 
These verification efforts may be carried out through program reviews, 
audits, and investigations and may include contacting employers to 
determine income, contacting a food stamp or welfare office to determine 
current certification for receipt of food stamps or AFDC benefits, 
contacting the State employment security office to determine the amount 
of benefits received and checking the documentation produced by 
household members to prove the amount of income received. These efforts 
may result in a loss or reduction of benefits, administrative claims or 
legal actions if incorrect information was reported; and
    (v) This information must be provided to the attention of each adult 
household member disclosing his/her social security number. State 
agencies and school food authorities shall ensure that the notice 
complies with section 7 of Pub. L. 93-579 (Privacy Act of 1974). These 
households shall be provided with the name and phone number of a school 
official who can assist in the verification effort. Selected households 
shall also be informed that, in lieu of any information that would 
otherwise be required, they can submit proof of current food stamp or 
AFDC Program certification as described in paragraph (a)(3) of this 
section to verify the free meal eligibility of a child who is a member 
of a food stamp household or AFDC assistance unit. All households 
selected for verification shall be advised that failure to cooperate 
with verification efforts will result in the termination of benefits.
    (3) Food stamp of AFDC recipients. On applications where households 
have furnished food stamp or AFDC case numbers, verification shall be 
accomplished either by confirming with the

[[Page 259]]

local food stamp or welfare office that each child, for whom application 
was made and a number provided, is a member of a currently certified 
food stamp household or AFDC assistance unit; or by obtaining from the 
household a copy of a current ``Notice of Eligibility'' for Food Stamp 
or AFDC Program benefits or equivalent official documentation issued by 
the food stamp or welfare office which confirms that the child is a 
member of a currently certified food stamp household or AFDC assistance 
unit. An identification card for either program is not acceptable as 
verification unless it contains an expiration date. If it is not 
established that the child is a member of a currently certified food 
stamp household or AFDC assistance unit, the procedures for adverse 
action specified at Sec. 245.6a(e) shall be followed. The notification 
of forthcoming termination of benefits provided to such households shall 
include a request for household income information and for written 
evidence which confirms household income to assist those households in 
establishing continued eligibility for free meal benefits.
    (4) Household cooperation. If a household refuses to cooperate with 
efforts to verify, eligibility for free or reduced price benefits shall 
be terminated in accordance with Sec. 245.6a(e). Households which refuse 
to complete the verification process and which are consequently 
determined ineligible for such benefits shall be counted toward meeting 
the School Food Authority's required sample of verified households.
    (5) Exceptions from verification. Verification efforts are not 
required in residential child care institutions; schools in which FCS 
has approved special cash assistance claims based on economic statistics 
regarding per capita income; or schools in which all children are served 
with no separate charge for food service and no special cash assistance 
is claimed. School Food Authorities in which all schools participate in 
the Special Assistance Certification and Reimbursement Alternatives 
specified in Sec. 245.9 shall meet the verification requirement only in 
those years in which applications are taken for all children in 
attendance.
    (b) Sources of information. Sources of information for verification 
may include written evidence, collateral contacts, and systems of 
records.
    (1) Written evidence. Written evidence shall be used as the primary 
source of information for verification. Written evidence includes 
written confirmation of a household's circumstances, such as wage stubs, 
award letters, and letters from employers. Whenever written evidence is 
insufficient to confirm income information on the application or current 
eligibility, the school may require collateral contacts.
    (2) Collateral contact. Collateral contact is a verbal confirmation 
of a household's circumstances by a person outside of the household. The 
collateral contact may be made by person or by phone. The verifying 
official may select a collateral contact if the household fails to 
designate one or designates one which is unacceptable to the verifying 
official. If the verifying official designates a collateral contact, the 
contact shall not be made without providing written or oral notice to 
the household. At the time of this notice, the household shall be 
informed that it may consent to the contact or provide acceptable 
verification in another form. If the household refuses to choose one of 
these options, its eligibility shall be terminated in accordance with 
the normal procedures for failure to cooperate with verification 
efforts. Collateral contacts could include employers, social service 
agencies, and migrant agencies.
    (3) Agency records. Agency records to which the State agency or 
School Food Authority may have access are not considered collateral 
contacts. Information concerning income, household size or food stamp/
AFDC eligibility maintained by other government agencies to which the 
State agency, School Food Authority, or school can legally gain access 
may be used to confirm a household's income, size or receipt of 
benefits. One possible source could be wage and benefit information 
maintained by the State employment agency, if that information is 
available. The use of any information derived from other agencies must 
be used with the applicable safeguards concerning disclosure.

[[Page 260]]

    (c) Verification recordkeeping. School Food Authorities verifying 
applications shall maintain on file for review a description of the 
verification to be accomplished beginning School Year 1983-84. The 
description shall include:
    (1) A summary of the verification efforts including the techniques 
to be used;
    (2) the total number of applications on file by October 31;
    (3) the percentage or number of applications verified;
    (4) all verified applications must be readily retrievable by school 
and include all documents submitted by the household in an effort to 
confirm eligibility, reproductions of those documents, or annotations 
made by the determining official which indicate which documents were 
submitted by the household and the date of submission;
    (5) documentation of any changes in eligibility and the reasons for 
the changes; and
    (6) all relevant correspondences between the household selected for 
verification and the school food authority/school.
    (d) Nondiscrimination. The verification efforts shall be applied 
without regard to race, sex, color, national origin, age, or handicap.
    (e) Adverse action. If verification activities fail to confirm 
eligibility for free or reduced price benefits or should the household 
fail to cooperate with verification efforts, the school or School Food 
Authority shall reduce or terminate benefits, as applicable, as follows: 
Ten days advance notification shall be provided to households that are 
to receive a reduction or termination of benefits, prior to the actual 
reduction or termination. The first day of the 10 day advance notice 
period shall be the day the notice is sent. The notice shall advise the 
household of:
    (1) The change; (2) the reasons for the change; (3) notification of 
the right to appeal and when the appeal must be filed to ensure 
continued benefits while awaiting a hearing and decision; (4) 
instructions on how to appeal; and (5) the right to reapply at any time 
during the school year. The reasons for ineligibility shall be properly 
documented and retained on file at the School Food Authority.

(Sec. 803, Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 521-535 (42 U.S.C. 1758))

[48 FR 12510, Mar. 25, 1983, as amended at 49 FR 26034, June 26, 1984; 
52 FR 19275, May 22, 1987; 55 FR 19240, May 9, 1990; 56 FR 32950, July 
17, 1991; 56 FR 33861, July 24, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 245.7   Hearing procedure for families and School Food Authorities.

    (a) Each School Food Authority of a school participating in the 
National School Lunch Program, School Breakfast Program or the Special 
Milk Program or of a commodity only school shall establish a hearing 
procedure under which:
    (1) A family can appeal from a decision made by the School Food 
Authority with respect to an application the family has made for free or 
reduced price meals or for free milk, and (2) the School Food Authority 
can challenge the continued eligibility of any child for a free or 
reduced price meal or for free milk. The hearing procedure shall provide 
for both the family and the School Food Authority:
    (i) A simple, publicly announced method to make an oral or written 
request for a hearing;
    (ii) An opportunity to be assisted or represented by an attorney or 
other person;
    (iii) An opportunity to examine, prior to and during the hearing, 
any documents and records presented to support the decision under 
appeal;
    (iv) That the hearing shall be held with reasonable promptness and 
convenience, and that adequate notice shall be given as to the time and 
place of the hearing;
    (v) An opportunity to present oral or documentary evidence and 
arguments supporting a position without undue interference;
    (vi) An opportunity to question or refute any testimony or other 
evidence and to confront and cross-examine any adverse witnesses;
    (vii) That the hearing shall be conducted and the decision made by a 
hearing official who did not participate in making the decision under 
appeal or in any previously held conference;
    (viii) That the decision of the hearing official shall be based on 
the oral and

[[Page 261]]

documentary evidence presented at the hearing and made a part of the 
hearing record;
    (ix) That the parties concerned and any designated representative 
shall be notified in writing of the decision of the hearing official;
    (x) That a written record shall be prepared with respect to each 
hearing, which shall include the challenge or the decision under appeal, 
any documentary evidence and a summary of any oral testimony presented 
at the hearing, the decision of the hearing official, including the 
reasons therefor, and a copy of the notification to the parties 
concerned of the decision of the hearing official; and
    (xi) That the written record of each hearing shall be preserved for 
a period of 3 years and shall be available for examination by the 
parties concerned or their representatives at any reasonable time and 
place during that period.
    (b) Continuation of benefits. When a household disagrees with an 
adverse action which affects its benefits and requests a fair hearing, 
benefits shall be continued as follows while the household awaits the 
hearing and decision:
    (1) Households that have been approved for benefits and that are 
subject to a reduction or termination of benefits later in the same 
school year shall receive continued benefits if they appeal the adverse 
action within the 10 day advance notice period; and
    (2) Households that are denied benefits upon application shall not 
receive benefits.

(44 U.S.C. 3506; sec. 803, Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 521-535 (42 U.S.C. 
1758))

[Amdt. 6, 39 FR 30339, Aug. 22, 1974, as amended at 47 FR 746, Jan. 7, 
1982; 48 FR 12511, Mar. 25, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 245.8    Nondiscrimination practices for children eligible to receive free and reduced price meals and free milk.

    School Food Authorities of schools participating in the National 
School Lunch Program, School Breakfast Program or Special Milk Program 
or of commodity only schools shall take all actions that are necessary 
to insure compliance with the following nondiscrimination practices for 
children eligible to receive free and reduced price meals or free milk:
    (a) The names of the children shall not be published, posted or 
announced in any manner;
    (b) There shall be no overt identification of any of the children by 
the use of special tokens or tickets or by any other means;
    (c) The children shall not be required to work for their meals or 
milk;
    (d) The children shall not be required to use a separate dining 
area, go through a separate serving line, enter the dining area through 
a separate entrance or consume their meals or milk at a different time;
    (e) When more than one lunch or breakfast or type of milk is offered 
which meets the requirements prescribed in Sec. 210.10, Sec. 210.15a, 
Sec. 220.8 or Sec. 215.2(1) of this chapter, the children shall have the 
same choice of meals or milk that is available to those children who pay 
the full price for their meal or milk.

[Amdt. 6, 39 FR 30339, Aug. 22, 1974]


<R05>
Sec. 245.9  Special assistance certification and reimbursement alternatives.

    (a) A School Food Authority of a school having at least 80 percent 
of its enrolled children determined eligible for free or reduced price 
meals may, at its option, authorize the school to reduce annual 
certification and public notification for those children eligible for 
free meals to once every two consecutive school years. This alternative 
shall be known as provision 1 and the following requirements shall 
apply:
    (1) A School Food Authority of a school operating under provision 1 
requirements shall publicly notify in accordance with Sec. 245.5, 
parents of enrolled children who are receiving free meals once every two 
consecutive school years, and shall publicly notify in accordance with 
Sec. 245.5, parents of all other enrolled children on an annual basis.
    (2) The 80 percent enrollment eligibility for this alternative shall 
be based on the school's March enrollment data of the previous school 
year, or on other comparable data.
    (3) A School Food Authority of a school operating under provision 1, 
shall count the number of free, reduced

[[Page 262]]

price and paid meals served to children in that school as the basis for 
monthly reimbursement claims.
    (b) A School Food Authority of a school which serves all enrolled 
children in that school free meals may publicly notify and certify 
children in accordance with Sec. 245.5 for free and reduced price meals 
for up to three consecutive school years; provided that eligibility 
determinations shall be in accordance with Sec. 245.3, during the first 
school year. This alternative shall be known as provision 2 and the 
following requirements shall apply:
    (1) Except for assistance properly made available under parts 210, 
220, 240, and 250 and by other legislation, a School Food Authority of a 
school operating under provision 2 requirements agrees to pay with funds 
from other than Federal sources for:
    (i) Meals served to children not eligible, as determined by 
Sec. 245.3, for free or reduced price meals, and
    (ii) The differential between the per meal cost and Federal 
reimbursement received for each free or reduced price meal, 
respectively, served to children eligible to receive such meals under 
applicable program regulations.
    (2) For the purpose of calculating reimbursement claims in the 
second and third consecutive school years the monthly meal counts of the 
actual number of meals served by type--free, reduced price, and paid--
shall be converted each month to percentages for each meal type. These 
percentages shall be derived by dividing the monthly total number of 
meals served of one meal type (e.g. free meals) by the total number of 
meals served in the same month for all meal types (free, reduced price 
and paid meals). The percentages for the reduced price meal and paid 
meal types shall be calculated exactly as the above example for free 
meals. These three percentages calculated at the end of each month of 
the first school year, shall be multiplied by the corresponding monthly 
meal count total of all meal types served in the second and third 
consecutive school years in order to calculate reimbursement claims for 
free, reduced price and paid meals each month.
    (c) A School Food Authority shall submit a list of all schools 
participating in either provision 1 or provision 2 and the intitial year 
of implementation in their Free and Reduced Price Meal Policy Statement. 
This Statement shall include certification of meeting the eligibility 
requirements as set forth in paragraph (a) or (b) of this section.
    (d) The School Food Authority upon request shall make documentation 
including enrollment data, participation data or other data available 
for monitoring purposes.
    (e) A School Food Authority may return to standard notification and 
application procedures in the following school year if standard 
procedures better suit the school's program needs.
    (f) Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands, where a statistical survey 
procedure is permitted in lieu of eligibility determinations for each 
child, may either maintain their standard procedures in accordance with 
Sec. 245.4, or may opt for these provisions provided the eligibility 
requirements as set forth in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section are 
met.
    (g) Schools currently operating under provision 1 or provision 2 of 
the Special Assistance interim rule published May 18, 1979 (44 FR 
29027), may complete their second or third consecutive school year under 
the interim requirements, after which, Sec. 245.9 shall be in effect. 
For all other schools, the final rule shall be effective upon 
publication.

(Sec. 9, Pub. L. 95-166, 91 Stat. 1336 (42 U.S.C. 1759a); secs. 805, and 
819, Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 521-535 (42 U.S.C. 1773))

[Amdt. 19, 45 FR 67287, Oct. 10, 1980, as amended by Amdt. 23, 47 FR 
14135, Apr. 2, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 245.10   Action by School Food Authorities.

    (a) Each School Food Authority of a school desiring to participate 
in the National School Lunch Program, School Breakfast Program, or to 
provide free milk under the Special Milk Program, or to become a 
commodity-only school shall submit for approval to the State agency a 
free and reduced price policy statement. Such policy statement, as a 
minimum, shall contain the following:

[[Page 263]]

    (1) The official or officials designated by the school food 
authority to make eligibility determinations on its behalf for free and 
reduced price meals or for free milk;
    (2) The family-size income guidelines to be used by schools under 
their jurisdiction in determining the eligibility of children for free 
and reduced price meals or for free milk in accordance with the 
provisions of Sec. 245.3.
    (3) The specific procedures the school food authority will use in 
accepting applications from families for free and reduced price meals or 
for free milk.
    (4) A description of the method or methods to be used to collect 
payments from those children paying the full price of the meal or milk, 
or a reduced price of a meal, which will prevent the overt 
identification of the children receiving a free meal or free milk or a 
reduced price meal, and
    (5) An assurance that the school will abide by the hearing procedure 
set forth in Sec. 245.7 and the nondiscrimination practices set forth in 
Sec. 245.8.
    (b) The policy statement submitted by each school food authority 
shall be accompanied by a copy of the application form to be used by the 
school and of the proposed letter or notice to parents.
    (c) Each year, if a School Food Authority does not have its policy 
statement approved by the State agency, or FCSRO where applicable, by 
October 15, reimbursement shall be suspended for any meals or milk 
served until such time as the School Food Authority's free and reduced 
price policy statement has been approved by the State agency, or FCSRO 
where applicable. Furthermore, no commodities donated by the Department 
shall be used in any school after October 15, until such time as the 
School Food Authority's free and reduced price policy statement has been 
approved by the State agency, or FCSRO where applicable. Once the School 
Food Authority's free and reduced price policy statement has been 
approved, reimbursement may be allowed, at the discretion of the State 
agency, or FCSRO where applicable, for eligible meals and milk served 
during the period of suspension.
    (d) If any free and reduced price policy statement submitted for 
approval by any School Food Authority to the State agency, or FCSRO 
where applicable, is determined to be not in compliance with the 
provisions of this part, the School Food Authority shall submit a policy 
statement that does meet the provisions within 30 days after 
notification by the State agency, or FCSO where applicable.
    (e) When revision of a School Food Authority's approved free and 
reduced price policy statement is necessitated because of a change in 
the family-size income standards of the State agency, or FCSRO where 
applicable, or because of other program changes, the School Food 
Authority shall have 60 days from the date the State agency announces 
the change in which to have its revised policy statement approved by the 
State agency, or FCSRO where applicable. In the event that a School Food 
Authority's proposed revised free and reduced price policy statement has 
not been submitted to, and approved by, the State agency, or FCSRO where 
applicable, within 60 days following the public announcement by the 
State agency, reimbursement shall be suspended for any meals or milk 
served after the end of the 60-day period. No commodities donated by the 
Department shall be used in any school after the end of the 60-day 
period, until such time as the School Food Authority's free and reduced 
price policy statement has been approved by the State agency, or FCSRO 
where applicable. Reimbursement may be allowed at the discretion of the 
State agency, or FCSRO where applicable, for eligible meals and milk 
served during the period of suspension once the School Food Authority's 
free and reduced price policy statement has been approved by the State 
agency, or FCSRO where applicable. Pending approval of a revision of a 
policy statement, the existing statement shall remain in effect.

(Sec. 8, Pub. L. 95-627, 92 Stat. 3623 (42 U.S.C. 1758); sec. 5, Pub. L. 
95-627, 92 Stat. 3619 (42 U.S.C. 1772); 44 U.S.C. 3506; sec. 803, Pub. 
L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 521-535 (42 U.S.C. 1758))

[35 FR 14065, Sept. 4, 1970, as amended at 38 FR 14958, June 7, 1973; 
Amdt. 6, 39 FR 30339, Aug. 22, 1974; Amdt. 8, 40 FR 57208, Dec. 8, 1975; 
Admt. 13, 44 FR 33049, June 8, 1979; 47 FR 746, Jan. 7, 1982; 48 FR 
12511, Mar. 25, 1983]

[[Page 264]]


<R05>
Sec. 245.11  Action by State agencies and FCSROs.

    (a) Each State agency, or FCSRO where applicable, shall, for schools 
under its jurisdiction:
    (1) Issue an annual prototype free and reduced price policy 
statement and any other instructions necessary to assure that School 
Food Authorities are fully informed of the provisions of this part. If 
the State elects to establish for all schools a maximum price for 
reduced price lunches that is less than 40 cents, the State shall 
establish such price in its prototype policy. Such State shall then 
receive the adjusted national average factor provided for in 
Sec. 210.4(b); (2) prescribe and publicly announce by July 1 of each 
fiscal year, in accordance with Sec. 245.3(a), family-size income 
standards. Any standards prescribed by FCSRO with respect to nonprofit 
private schools shall be developed by FCSRO after consultation with the 
State agency.
    (a-1) When a revision of the family-size income standards of the 
State agency, or FCSRO where applicable, is necessitated because of a 
change in the Secretary's income poverty guidelines or because of other 
program changes, the State agency shall publicly announce its revised 
family-size income standards no later than 30 days after the Secretary 
has announced such change.
    (b) State agencies, and FCSRO where applicable, shall review the 
policy statements submitted by school-food authorities for compliance 
with the provisions of this part and inform the school-food authorities 
of any necessary changes or amendments required in any policy statement 
to bring such statement into compliance. They shall notify school-food 
authorities in writing of approval of their policy statements and shall 
direct them to distribute promptly the public announcements required 
under the provisions of Sec. 245.5.
    (c) Each State agency, or FCSRO where applicable, shall instruct 
School Food Authorities under their jurisdiction that they may not alter 
or amend the eligibility criteria set forth in an approved policy 
statement without advance approval of the State agency, or FCSRO where 
applicable.
    (d) Not later than 10 days after the State agency, or FCSRO where 
applicable, announces its family-size income standards, it shall notify 
School Food Authorities in writing of any amendment to their free and 
reduced price policy statements necessary to bring the family-sized 
income criteria into conformance with the State agency's or FCSRO's 
family-size income standards.
    (e) Except as provided in Sec. 245.10, the State agency, or FCSRO 
where applicable, shall neither disburse any funds, nor authorize the 
distribution of commodities donated by the Department to any school 
unless the school food authority has an approved free and reduced price 
policy statement on file with the State Agency, or FCSRO where 
applicable.
    (f) Each State agency, or FCSRO where applicable, shall, in the 
course of its supervisory assistance, review and evaluate the 
performance of School Food Authorities and of schools in fulfilling the 
requirements of this part, and shall advise School Food Authorities of 
any deficiencies found and any corrective action required to be taken.

(Secs. 801, 803, 812; Pub. L. 97-35, 95 Stat. 521-535 (42 U.S.C. 1753, 
1758, 1759(a), 1773, 1778))

[35 FR 14065, Sept. 4, 1970, as amended at 38 FR 14958, June 7, 1973; 
Amdt. 8, 40 FR 57208, Dec. 8, 1975; 44 FR 1364, Jan. 5, 1979; 46 FR 
51368, Oct. 20, 1981; 48 FR 12511, Mar. 25, 1983; 52 FR 19276, May 22, 
1987]


<R05>
Sec. 245.12  Fraud penalties.

    (a) Whoever embezzles, willfully misapplies, steals, or obtains by 
fraud any funds, assets, or property provided under this part, whether 
received directly or indirectly from the Department, shall--
    (1) If such funds, assets, or property are of a value of $100 or 
more, be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned not more than five 
years of both; or
    (2) If such funds, assets, or property are of a value of less than 
$100, be fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than one year 
or both.
    (b) Whoever receives, conceals, or retains to his use or gain funds, 
assets, or property provided under this part, whether received directly 
or indirectly from the Department, knowing such funds, assets, or 
property have been

[[Page 265]]

embezzled, willfully misapplied, stolen, or obtained by fraud, shall be 
subject to the same penalties provided in paragraph (a) of this section.

(Sec. 10(a), Pub. L. 95-627, 92 Stat. 3623 (42 U.S.C. 1760); sec. 14, 
Pub. L. 95-627, 92 Stat. 3625-3626)

[Amdt. 14, 44 FR 37901, June 29, 1979]


<R05>
Sec. 245.13  Special responsibilities of State agencies.

    (a) State agencies shall require School Food Authorities of schools 
selected for participation in the Department of Health, Education, and 
Welfare Public School Civil Rights Survey to gather information on the 
race and ethnic background of children for whom applications for free 
and reduced price meals are filed.
    (b) To comply with the provisions of Sec. 245.13(a) of this part, 
State agencies at their discretion may permit such School Food 
Authorities the option of requesting parents on application forms to 
voluntarily identify the race or ethnic background of their child for 
whom application is being made. Parents' provision of this information 
is purely voluntary and failure to provide this information will not 
affect the eligibility for benefits of the child for whom application is 
made. School Food Authorities shall develop alternative means of 
providing racial and ethnic data for applicants when such information is 
not voluntarily provided by parents on the application.
    (c) School Food Authorities for such survey schools which are 
granted the option by the State agency and wish to request that the 
parents voluntarily identify the race or ethnic background of their 
children on the application form shall include the following statement 
on the letter to parents: ``A survey is being conducted in your child's 
school to collect racial and ethnic data on applicants. This information 
is voluntary and will not affect your child's eligibility. This 
information is being collected to be sure everyone receives school meals 
on a fair basis, without regard to race, color, or national origin.'' 
Such schools shall also include the following statement on the 
application: ``Please check in the space provided the racial or ethnic 
identity of your child(ren). This information is voluntary and will not 
affect your child's eligibility. This information is being collected 
only to be sure that everyone receives school meals on a fair basis, 
without regard to race, color, or national origin.'' Schools which 
provide for racial and ethnic identification data collection of 
applicants by means other than parental self-identification need not 
include the above statements on the application or parental letter.
    (d) Participation in the survey shall not affect reimbursement or 
individual eligibility for program participation or benefits. The data 
collected shall be confidential and shall be used solely to determine 
the equitable distribution of benefits without regard to race, color, or 
national origin.

(Sec. 602, Pub. L. 88-352, 78 Stat. 252 (42 U.S.C. 2000d-1))

[45 FR 1000, Jan. 4, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 245.14  Information collection/recordkeeping--OMB assigned control numbers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Current OMB
       7 CFR section where requirements are described          control  
                                                                number  
------------------------------------------------------------------------
245.3 (a), (b).............................................    0584-0026
245.4......................................................    0584-0026
245.5 (a), (b).............................................    0584-0026
245.6 (a), (b), (c), (e)...................................    0584-0026
245.7(a)...................................................    0584-0026
245.9 (a), (b), (c)........................................    0584-0026
245.10 (a), (d), (e).......................................    0584-0026
245.11 (a), (a-1), (b), (c), (d), (f)......................    0584-0026
245.13(a)-(c)..............................................    0584-0026
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[50 FR 53258, Dec. 31, 1985]


<R03>
PART 246--SPECIAL SUPPLEMENTAL NUTRITION PROGRAM FOR WOMEN, INFANTS AND CHILDREN--Table of Contents

<R05>


                           Subpart A--General

Sec.
246.1  General purpose and scope.
246.2  Definitions.
246.3  Administration.

              Subpart B--State and Local Agency Eligibility

246.4  State Plan.
246.5  Selection of local agencies.
246.6  Agreements with local agencies.

[[Page 266]]

                   Subpart C--Participant Eligibility

246.7  Certification of participants.
246.8  Nondiscrimination.
246.9  Fair hearing procedures for participants.

                     Subpart D--Participant Benefits

246.10  Supplemental foods.
246.11  Nutrition education.

                   Subpart E--State Agency Provisions

246.12  Food delivery systems.
246.13  Financial management system.
246.14  Program costs.
246.15  Program income other than grants.
246.16  Distribution of funds.
246.17  Closeout procedures.
246.18  Administrative appeal of State agency decisions.

                    Subpart F--Monitoring and Review

246.19  Management evaluation and reviews.
246.20  Audits.
246.21  Investigations.

                   Subpart G--Miscellaneous Provisions

246.22  Administrative appeal of FCS decisions.
246.23  Claims and penalties.
246.24  Procurement and property management.
246.25  Records and reports.
246.26  Other provisions.
246.27  Program information.
246.28  OMB control numbers.

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 1786.

    Source: 50 FR 6121, Feb. 13, 1985, unless otherwise noted.

    Editorial Note: For nomenclature changes to part 246 see 59 FR 
11498, Mar. 11, 1994.


<R04>
                           Subpart A--General


<R05>
Sec. 246.1  General purpose and scope.

    This part announces regulations under which the Secretary of 
Agriculture shall carry out the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program 
for Women, Infants and Children (WIC Program). Section 17 of the Child 
Nutrition Act of 1966, as amended, states in part that the Congress 
finds that substantial numbers of pregnant, postpartum and breastfeeding 
women, infants and young children from families with inadequate income 
are at special risk with respect to their physical and mental health by 
reason of inadequate nutrition or health care, or both. The purpose of 
the Program is to provide supplemental foods and nutrition education 
through payment of cash grants to State agencies which administer the 
Program through local agencies at no cost to eligible persons. The 
Program shall serve as an adjunct to good health care during critical 
times of growth and development, in order to prevent the occurrence of 
health problems, including drug and other harmful substance abuse, and 
to improve the health status of these persons. The program shall be 
supplementary to the Food Stamp Program; any program under which foods 
are distributed to needy families in lieu of food stamps; and receipt of 
food or meals from soup kitchens, or shelters, or other forms of 
emergency food assistance.

[50 FR 6121, Feb. 13, 1985, as amended at 54 FR 51294, Dec. 14, 1989; 58 
FR 11506, Feb. 26, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 246.2  Definitions.

    For the purpose of this part and all contracts, guidelines, 
instructions, forms and other documents related hereto, the term:
    Affirmative Action Plan means that portion of the State Plan which 
describes how the Program will be initiated and expanded within the 
State's jurisdiction in accordance with Sec. 246.4(a).
    A-130 means Office of Management and Budget Circular A-130, which 
provides guidance for the coordinated development and operation of 
information systems.
    Breastfeeding means the practice of feeding a mother's breastmilk to 
her infant(s) on the average of at least once a day.
    Breastfeeding women means women up to one year postpartum who are 
breastfeeding their infants.
    Categorical eligibility means persons who meet the definitions of 
pregnant women, breastfeeding women, postpartum women, or infants or 
children.
    Certification means the implementation of criteria and procedures to 
assess and document each applicant's eligibility for the Program.

[[Page 267]]

    Children means persons who have had their first birthday but have 
not yet attained their fifth birthday.
    Clinic means a facility where applicants are certified.
    Competent professional authority means an individual on the staff of 
the local agency authorized to determine nutritional risk and prescribe 
supplemental foods. The following persons are the only persons the State 
agency may authorize to serve as a competent professional authority: 
Physicians, nutritionists (bachelor's or master's degree in Nutritional 
Sciences, Community Nutrition, Clinical Nutrition, Dietetics, Public 
Health Nutrition or Home Economics with emphasis in Nutrition), 
dieticians, registered nurses, physician's assistants (certified by the 
National Committee on Certification of Physician's Assistants or 
certified by the State medical certifying authority), or State or local 
medically trained health officials. This definition also applies to an 
individual who is not on the staff of the local agency but who is 
qualified to provide data upon which nutritional risk determinations are 
made by a competent professional authority on the staff of the local 
agency.
    Competitive bidding means a procurement process under which FCS or 
the State agency selects a single source (such as a single infant 
formula manufacturer offering the lowest price), as determined by the 
submission of sealed bids, for a product for which bids are sought for 
use in the Program.
    Cost containment measure means a competitive bidding, rebate, direct 
distribution, or home delivery system implemented by a State agency as 
described in its approved State Plan of operation and administration.
    CSFP means the Commodity Supplemental Food Program administered by 
the Department, authorized by section 5 of the Agriculture and Consumer 
Protection Act of 1973, as amended, and governed by part 247 of this 
title.
    Days means calendar days.
    Department means the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
    Discount means, with respect to a State agency that provides Program 
foods to participants without the use of retail grocery stores (such as 
a State agency that provides for the home delivery or direct 
distribution of supplemental food), the amount of the price reduction or 
other price concession provided to any State agency by the manufacturer 
or supplier of the particular food product as the result of the purchase 
of Program food by each such State agency, or its representative, from 
the manufacturer or supplier.
    Disqualification means the act of ending the Program participation 
of a participant, authorized food vendor, or authorized State or local 
agency, whether as a punitive sanction or for administrative reasons.
    Drug means:
    (a) A beverage containing alcohol;
    (b) A controlled substance (having the meaning given it in section 
102(6) of the Controlled Substance Act (21 U.S.C. 802(6)); or
    (c) A controlled substance analogue (having the meaning given it in 
section 102(32) of the Controlled Substance Act (21 U.S.C. 802(32)).
    Dual participation means simultaneous participation in the Program 
in one or more than one WIC clinic, or participation in the Program and 
in the CSFP during the same period of time.
    Family means a group of related or nonrelated individuals who are 
living together as one economic unit, except that residents of a 
homeless facility or an institution shall not all be considered as 
members of a single family.
    Fiscal year means the period of 12 calendar months beginning October 
1 of any calendar year and ending September 30 of the following calendar 
year.
    FCS means the Food and Consumer Service of the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture.
    Food costs means the costs of supplemental foods, determined in 
accordance with Sec. 246.14(b).
    Food delivery system means the method used by State and local 
agencies to provide supplemental foods to participants.
    Food instrument means a voucher, check, coupon or other document 
which is used by a participant to obtain supplemental foods.
    Health services means ongoing, routine pediatric and obstetric care 
(such as infant and child care and prenatal

[[Page 268]]

and postpartum examinations) or referral for treatment.
    Homeless facility means the following types of facilities which 
provide meal service. A supervised publicly or privately operated 
shelter (including a welfare hotel or congregate shelter) designed to 
provide temporary living accommodations; a facility that provides a 
temporary residence for individuals intended to be institutionalized; or 
a public or private place not designed for, or normally used as, a 
regular sleeping accommodation for human beings.
    Homeless individual means a woman, infant or child who lacks a fixed 
and regular nighttime residence; or whose primary nighttime residence 
is: A supervised publicly or privately operated shelter (including a 
welfare hotel, a congregate shelter, or a shelter for victims of 
domestic violence) designated to provide temporary living accommodation; 
an institution that provides a temporary residence for individuals 
intended to be institutionalized; a temporary accommodation in the 
residence of another individual; or a public or private place not 
designed for, or ordinarily used as, a regular sleeping accommodation 
for human beings.
    IHS means the Indian Health Service of the U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services.
    Institution means any residential accommodation which provides meal 
service, except private residences and homeless facilities.
    Infants means persons under one year of age.
    Local agency means: (a) A public or private, nonprofit health or 
human service agency which provides health services, either directly or 
through contract, in accordance with Sec. 246.5; (b) an IHS service 
unit; (c) an Indian tribe, band or group recognized by the Department of 
the Interior which operates a health clinic or is provided health 
services by an IHS service unit; or (d) an intertribal council or group 
that is an authorized representative of Indian tribes, bands or groups 
recognized by the Department of the Interior, which operates a health 
clinic or is provided health services by an IHS service unit.
    Members of populations means persons with a common special need who 
do not necessarily reside in a specific geographic area, such as off-
reservation Indians or migrant farmworkers and their families.
    Migrant farmworker means an individual whose principal employment is 
in agriculture on a seasonal basis, who has been so employed within the 
last 24 months, and who establishes, for the purposes of such 
employment, a temporary abode.
    Net price means the difference between the manufacturer's wholesale 
price for infant formula and the rebate level offered or provided by the 
manufacturer under an infant formula cost containment contract entered 
into with the pertinent State agency.
    Nonprofit agency means a private agency which is exempt from income 
tax under the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended.
    Nutrition education means individual or group education sessions and 
the provision of information and educational materials designed to 
improve health status, achieve positive change in dietary habits, and 
emphasize relationships between nutrition and health, all in keeping 
with the individual's personal, cultural, and socioeconomic preferences.
    Nutrition Services and Administration (NSA) Costs means those direct 
and indirect costs, exclusive of food costs, as defined in 
Sec. 246.14(c), which State and local agencies determine to be necessary 
to support Program operations. Costs include, but are not limited to, 
the costs of Program administration, start-up, monitoring, auditing, the 
development of and accountability for food delivery systems, nutrition 
education and breastfeeding promotion and support, outreach, 
certification, and developing and printing food instruments.
    Nutritional risk means: (a) Detrimental or abnormal nutritional 
conditions detectable by biochemical or anthropometric measurements; (b) 
other documented nutritionally related medical conditions; (c) dietary 
deficiencies that impair or endanger health; or (d) conditions that 
predispose persons to inadequate nutritional patterns or nutritionally 
related medical conditions.

[[Page 269]]

    OIG means the Department's Office of the Inspector General.
    Other harmful substances means other substances such as tobacco, 
prescription drugs and over-the-counter medications that can be harmful 
to the health of the WIC population, especially the pregnant woman and 
her fetus.
    Participants means pregnant women, breastfeeding women, postpartum 
women, infants and children who are receiving supplemental foods or food 
instruments under the Program, and the breastfed infants of participant 
breastfeeding women.
    Participation means the sum of the number of persons who have 
received supplemental foods or food instruments during the reporting 
period and the number of infants breastfed by participant breastfeeding 
women (and receiving no supplemental foods or food instruments) during 
the reporting period.
    Postpartum women means women up to six months after termination of 
pregnancy.
    Poverty income guidelines means the poverty income guidelines 
prescribed by the Department of Health and Human Services. These 
guidelines are adjusted annually by the Department of Health and Human 
Services, with each annual adjustment effective July 1 of each year. The 
poverty income guidelines prescribed by the Department of Health and 
Human Services shall be used for all States, as defined in this section, 
except for Alaska and Hawaii. Separate poverty income guidelines are 
prescribed for Alaska and Hawaii.
    Pregnant women means women determined to have one or more embryos or 
fetuses in utero.
    Program means the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, 
Infants and Children (WIC) authorized by section 17 of the Child 
Nutrition Act of 1966, as amended.
    Rebate means the amount of money refunded under cost containment 
procedures to any State agency from the manufacturer of the particular 
food product as the result of the purchase of the supplemental food with 
a voucher or other purchase instrument by a participant in each State 
agency's program. Such rebates shall be payments made subsequent to the 
exchange of a food instrument for food.
    Residual funds means funds remaining available for allocation to 
State agencies after every State agency has received the amount 
allocable to it as stability funds in accordance with 
Secs. 246.16(c)(2)(i) and 246.16(c)(3)(i).
    Secretary means the Secretary of Agriculture.
    SFPD means the Supplemental Food Programs Division of the Food and 
Consumer Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
    7 CFR part 3016 means the Department's Uniform Federal Assistance 
Regulations. Part 3016 implements the policies established by the Office 
of Management and Budget (OMB) in Circulars A-21, A-87, A-102, A-110, 
and A-122, as well as OMB Guidance on Implementation of the Federal 
Grant and Cooperative Agreement Act of 1977.
    7 CFR part 3017 means the Department's Common Rule regarding 
Governmentwide Debarment and Suspension (Non-procurement) and 
Governmentwide Requirements for Drug-Free Workplace. Part 3017 
implements the requirements established by Executive Order 12549 
(February 18, 1986) and sections 5151-5160 of the Drug-Free Workplace 
Act of 1988 (Pub. L. 100-690).
    7 CFR part 3018 means the Department's Common Rule regarding 
Governmentwide New Restrictions on Lobbying. Part 3018 implements the 
requirements established by section 319 of the 1990 Appropriations Act 
for the Department of Interior and Related Agencies (Pub. L. 101-121).
    Stability funds means funds allocated to any State agency for the 
purpose of maintaining its preceding year Program operating level, in 
accordance with Secs. 246.16(c)(2)(i) and 246.16(c)(3)(i).
    State means any of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, the 
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, 
the Northern Marianas Islands, and the Trust Territory of the Pacific 
Islands.
    State agency means the health department or comparable agency of 
each State; an Indian tribe, band or group recognized by the Department 
of the Interior; an intertribal council or group which is an authorized 
representative of Indian tribes, bands or groups

[[Page 270]]

recognized by the Department of the Interior and which has an ongoing 
relationship with such tribes, bands or groups for other purposes and 
has contracted with them to administer the Program; or the appropriate 
area office of the IHS.
    State Plan means a plan of Program operation and administration that 
describes the manner in which the State agency intends to implement and 
operate all aspects of Program administration within its jurisdiction in 
accordance with Sec. 246.4.
    Supplemental foods means those foods containing nutrients determined 
to be beneficial for pregnant, breastfeeding, and postpartum women, 
infants and children, as prescribed by the Secretary in Sec. 246.10.

[50 FR 6121, Feb. 13, 1985; 50 FR 8098, Feb. 28, 1985, as amended at 52 
FR 25189, July 2, 1987; 54 FR 51294, Dec. 14, 1989; 55 FR 9717, Mar. 15, 
1990; 58 FR 11506, Feb. 26, 1993; 58 FR 47022, Sept. 7, 1993; 59 FR 
11498, Mar. 11, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 246.3  Administration.

    (a) Delegation to FCS. Within the Department, FCS shall act on 
behalf of the Department in the administration of the Program. Within 
FCS, SFPD and the Regional Offices are responsible for Program 
administration. FCS shall provide assistance to State and local agencies 
and evaluate all levels of Program operations to ensure that the goals 
of the Program are achieved in the most effective and efficient manner 
possible.
    (b) Delegation to State agency. The State agency is responsible for 
the effective and efficient administration of the Program in accordance 
with the requirements of this part; the Department's regulations 
governing nondiscrimination (7 CFR parts 15, 15a and 15b); governing 
administration of grants (7 CFR part 3016); governing nonprocurement 
debarment/suspension and drug-free workplace (7 CFR part 3017); and 
governing restrictions on lobbying (7 CFR part 3018); FCS guidelines; 
and, instructions issued under the FCS Directives Management System. The 
State agency shall provide guidance to local agencies on all aspects of 
Program operations.
    (c) Agreement and State Plan. (1) Each State agency desiring to 
administer the Program shall annually submit a State Plan and enter into 
a written agreement with the Department for administration of the 
Program in the jurisdiction of the State agency in accordance with the 
provisions of this part.
    (2) The written agreement shall include a certification/assurance 
regarding drug-free workplace as required by 7 CFR part 3017, and, if 
applicable, a certification regarding lobbying and a disclosure of 
lobbying activities as required by 7 CFR part 3018.
    (d) State agency eligibility. A State agency shall be ineligible to 
participate in the WIC Program if State or local sales tax is collected 
on WIC food purchases in the area in which it administers the program, 
except that, if sales tax is collected on WIC food purchases by 
sovereign Indian entities which are not State agencies, the State agency 
shall remain eligible if any vendors collecting such tax are 
disqualified.
    (e) State staffing standards. Each State agency shall ensure that 
sufficient staff is available to administer an efficient and effective 
Program including, but not limited to, the functions of nutrition 
education, certification, food delivery, fiscal reporting, monitoring, 
and training. Based on the June participation of the previous fiscal 
year, each State agency, as a minimum, shall employ the following staff:
    (1) A full-time or equivalent administrator when the monthly 
participation level exceeds 1,500, or a half-time or equivalent 
administrator when the monthly participation exceeds 500.
    (2) At least one full-time or equivalent Program specialist for each 
10,000 participants above 1,500, but the State agency need not employ 
more than eight Program specialists unless the State agency considers it 
necessary. Program specialists should be utilized for providing fiscal 
management and technical assistance, monitoring vendors, reviewing local 
agencies, training, and nutritional services, or other Program duties as 
assigned by the State agency.
    (3) For nutrition-related services, one full-time or equivalent 
nutritionist when the monthly participation is

[[Page 271]]

above 1,500, or a half-time or equivalent nutritionist when the monthly 
participation exceeds 500. The nutritionist shall be named State WIC 
Nutrition Coordinator and shall meet State personnel standards and 
qualifications in paragraphs (e)(3) (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), or (v) of 
this section and have the qualifications in paragraph (e)(3)(vi) of this 
section. Upon request, an exception to these qualifications may be 
granted by FCS. The State WIC Nutrition Coordinator shall--
    (i) Hold a Master's degree with emphasis in food and nutrition, 
community nutrition, public health nutrition, nutrition education, human 
nutrition, nutrition science or equivalent and have at least two years 
responsible experience as a nutritionist in education, social service, 
maternal and child health, public health, nutrition, or dietetics; or
    (ii) Be registered or eligible for registration with the American 
Dietetic Association and have at least two years experience; or
    (iii) Have at least a Bachelor of Science or Bachelor of Arts 
degree, from an accredited four-year institution, with emphasis in food 
and nutrition, community nutrition, public health nutrition, nutrition 
education, human nutrition, nutrition science or equivalent and have at 
least three years of responsible experience as a nutritionist in 
education, social service, maternal and child health, public health 
nutrition, or dietetics; or
    (iv) Be qualified as a Senior Public Health Nutritionist under the 
Department of Health and Human Services guidelines; or
    (v) Meet the IHS standards for a Public Health Nutritionist; and
    (vi) Have at least one of the following: Program development skills, 
education background and experience in the development of educational 
and training resource materials, community action experience, counseling 
skills or experience in participant advocacy.
    (4) A designated breastfeeding promotion coordinator, to coordinate 
breastfeeding promotion efforts identified in the State plan in 
accordance with the requirement of Sec. 246.4(a)(9) of this part. The 
person to whom the State agency assigns this responsibility may perform 
other duties as well.
    (5) The State agency shall enforce hiring practices which comply 
with the nondiscrimination criteria set forth in Sec. 246.8. The hiring 
of minority staff is encouraged.
    (f) Delegation to local agency. The local agency shall provide 
Program benefits to participants in the most effective and efficient 
manner, and shall comply with this part, the Department's regulations 
governing nondiscrimination (7 CFR parts 15, 15a, 15b), the Department's 
regulations governing the administration of grants (7 CFR part 3016), 
Office of Management and Budget Circular A-130, and State agency and FCS 
guidelines and instructions.

[50 FR 6121, Feb. 13, 1985; 50 FR 8098, Feb. 28, 1985, as amended at 52 
FR 21236, June 4, 1987; 59 FR 11499, Mar. 11, 1994]


<R04>
              Subpart B--State and Local Agency Eligibility


<R05>
Sec. 246.4  State Plan.

    (a) Requirements. By August 15 of each year, each State agency shall 
submit to FCS for approval a State Plan for the following fiscal year as 
a prerequisite to receiving funds under this section. The State agency 
may submit the State Plan in the format provided by FCS guidance. 
Alternatively, the State agency may submit the Plan in combination with 
other federally required planning documents or develop its own format, 
provided that the information required below is included. FCS requests 
advance notification that a State agency intends to use an alternative 
format. The State Plan shall be signed by the State designated official 
responsible for ensuring that the Program is operated in accordance with 
the State Plan. FCS will provide written approval or denial of a 
completed State Plan or amendment within 30 days of receipt. Within 15 
days after FCS receives an incomplete Plan, FCS will notify the State 
agency that additional information is needed to complete the Plan. Any 
disapproval will be accompanied by a statement of the reasons for the 
disapproval. Portions of

[[Page 272]]

the State Plan which do not change annually need not be resubmitted. 
However, the State agency shall provide the title of the sections that 
remain unchanged, as well as the year of the last Plan in which the 
sections were submitted. The Plan shall include:
    (1) An outline of the State agency's goals and objectives for 
improving Program operations.
    (2) A budget for nutrition services and administration funds, and an 
estimate of food expenditures.
    (3) An estimate of Statewide participation for the coming fiscal 
year by category of women, infants and children.
    (4) The State agency staffing pattern.
    (5) An Affirmative Action Plan which includes--
    (i) A list of all areas and special populations, in priority order 
based on relative need, within the jurisdiction of the State agency, the 
State agency's plans to initiate or expand operations under the Program 
in areas most in need of supplemental foods, including plans to inform 
nonparticipating local agencies of the availability and benefits of the 
Program and the availability of technical assistance in implementing the 
Program, and a description of how the State agency will take all 
reasonable actions to identify potential local agencies and encourage 
agencies to implement or expand operations under the Program within the 
following year in the neediest one-third of all areas unserved or 
partially served;
    (ii) An estimate of the number of potentially eligible persons in 
each area and a list of the areas in the Affirmative Action Plan which 
are currently operating the Program and their current participation, 
which participant priority levels as specified in Sec. 246.7 are being 
reached in each of these areas, and which areas in the Affirmative 
Action Plan are currently operating CSFP and their current 
participation; and
    (iii) A list of the names and addresses of all local agencies.
    (6) Plans to provide program benefits to eligible migrant 
farmworkers and their families, to Indians, and to homeless individuals.
    (7) The State agency's plans, to be conducted in cooperation with 
local agencies, for informing eligible persons of the availability of 
Program benefits, including the eligibility criteria for participation, 
the location of local agencies operating the Program, and the 
institutional conditions of Sec. 246.7(n)(1)(i) of this part, with 
emphasis on reaching and enrolling eligible women in the early months of 
pregnancy and migrants. Such information shall be publicly announced by 
the State agency and by local agencies at least annually. Such 
information shall also be distributed to offices and organizations that 
deal with significant numbers of potentially eligible persons, including 
health and medical organizations, hospitals and clinics, welfare and 
unemployment offices, social service agencies, farmworker organizations, 
Indian tribal organizations, organizations and agencies serving homeless 
individuals, and religious and community organizations in low-income 
areas.
    (8) A description of how the State agency plans to coordinate 
program operations with special counseling services and other programs, 
including, but not limited to, the Expanded Food and Nutrition Education 
Program (7 U.S.C. 343(d) and 3175), the Food Stamp Program (7 U.S.C. 
2011 et seq.), the Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnosis, and 
Treatment Program (Title XIX of the Social Security Act), the Aid to 
Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) Program (42 U.S.C. 601-615), the 
Maternal and Child Health (MCH) Program (42 U.S.C. 701-709), the 
Medicaid Program (42 U.S.C. 1396 et seq.), family planning, 
immunization, prenatal care, well-child care, drug and other harmful 
substance abuse counseling, treatment and education programs, child 
abuse counseling, and local programs for breastfeeding promotion.
    (9) The State agency's nutrition education goals and action plans, 
including a description of the methods that will be used to provide drug 
and other harmful substance abuse information, promote breastfeeding, 
and to meet the special nutrition education needs of migrant farmworkers 
and their families, Indians, and homeless persons.
    (10) For Indian State or local agencies that wish to apply for the 
alternate income determination procedure

[[Page 273]]

in accordance with Sec. 246.7(d)(2)(vii), documentation that the 
majority of Indian household members have incomes below eligibility 
criteria.
    (11) A copy of the procedure manual developed by the State agency 
for guidance to local agencies in operating the Program. The manual 
shall include--
    (i) Certification procedures, including a list of the specific 
nutritional risk criteria by priority level which cites conditions and 
indices to be used to determine a person's nutritional risk, the State 
agency's income guidelines for Program eligibility, and any adjustments 
to the participant priority system made pursuant to Sec. 246.7(e)(4) to 
accommodate high-risk postpartum women or the addition of Priority VII;
    (ii) Methods for providing nutrition education, including drug and 
other harmful substance abuse information, to participants, including 
homeless individuals;
    (iii) Instructions concerning all food delivery operations performed 
at the local level;
    (iv) Instructions for providing all records and reports which the 
State agency requires local agencies to maintain and submit; and
    (v) Instructions on coordinating operations under the program with 
drug and other harmful substance abuse counseling and treatment 
services.
    (12) A description of the State agency's financial management 
system.
    (13) A description of how the State agency will distribute nutrition 
services and administration funds, including start-up funds, to local 
agencies operating under the Program.
    (14) A description of the food delivery system as it operates at the 
State agency level, including--
    (i) All food delivery systems in use within the State agency's 
jurisdiction;
    (ii) Vendor selection criteria;
    (iii) A sample form for the written agreement between the food 
vendor and the State or local agency;
    (iv) The system for monitoring food vendors to ensure compliance and 
prevent fraud, waste and abuse, and the State agency's plans for 
improvement in the coming year;
    (v) Where food instruments are used, a facsimile of the food 
instrument, and the system for control and reconciliation of the food 
instruments;
    (vi) The procedures used to pay food vendors;
    (vii) The names of companies, excluding authorized food vendors, 
with whom the State agency has contracted to participate in the 
operation of the food delivery system;
    (viii) For State agencies applying for authority to covert food 
funds to nutrition services and administration funds under 
Sec. 246.16(g) of this part, a full description of their proposed food-
cost-cutting system or system modification, including an estimate of the 
increased participation which will result from their system or 
modification, together with an explanation of how the estimate was 
developed; and
    (ix) If the State agency plans to adapt its food delivery system to 
accommodate the needs of homeless individuals, a description of such 
adaptations.
    (x) Except for State agencies with an FCS-approved feasibility study 
demonstrating the infeasibility of implementing a cost containment 
system, a description of its cost containment systems. In addition, a 
State agency which is: Planning to implement a cost containment system 
for the first time; planning to change or modify its current system; 
seeking approval of a system instead of a competitive bidding system (in 
accordance with Sec. 246.16(m)(2)(iii) of this part); or requesting a 
waiver under Sec. 246.16(n) of this part shall, at least 90 days before 
the proposed effective date of its system change, submit a State Plan or 
Plan amendment, describing its proposed cost containment system, any 
cost comparison analyses conducted under Sec. 246.16(m), and for waivers 
based on interference with efficient or effective program operations, 
documentation of that claim. If FCS disputes the calculations or 
documentation supporting a cost comparison analysis or waiver request, 
it shall deem the plan amendment containing that information incomplete 
under Sec. 246.4(a), and shall provide the State agency with a written 
statement outlining disputed issues within 15 days of receipt of the 
State Plan amendment. In the case of such disputes, the State agency may

[[Page 274]]

not enter into any infant formula cost containment contract without FCS 
consent until the disputed issues are resolved. If necessary, FCS may 
grant a postponement under Sec. 246.16(o)(5) of this rule. If disputed 
issues remain unresolved at the end of the postponement period, the 
State agency must proceed with the cost containment system judged by FCS 
to comply with the provisions of this rule, or the State agency will be 
subject to the penalties set forth in Sec. 246.16(p) of this part.
    (15) Plans to prevent and detect dual participation. In States where 
the Program and the CSFP operate in the same area, or where an Indian 
State agency operates a Program in the same area as a geographic State 
agency, a copy of the written agreement between the State agencies for 
the detection and prevention of dual participation shall be submitted.
    (16) A description of the procedures the State will use to comply 
with the civil rights requirements described in Sec. 246.8, including 
the processing of discrimination complaints.
    (17) A copy of the State agency's fair hearing procedures for 
participants and the administrative appeal procedures for local agencies 
and food vendors.
    (18) The State agency's plan to provide program benefits to eligible 
persons most in need of benefits and to enroll eligible women in the 
early months of pregnancy, to the maximum extent practicable.
    (19) The State agency's plan to establish, to the extent 
practicable, that homeless facilities, and institutions if it chooses to 
make the Program available to them, meet the conditions established in 
Sec. 246.7(n)(1)(i) of this part, if residents of such accommodations 
are to be eligible to receive WIC Program benefits.
    (20) A plan to provide program benefits to unserved infants and 
children under the care of foster parents, protective services, or child 
welfare authorities, including infants exposed to drugs perinatally.
    (21) A plan to improve access to the program for participants and 
prospective applicants who are employed or who reside in rural areas, by 
addressing their special needs through the adoption or revision of 
procedures and practices to minimize the time participants and 
applicants must spend away from work and the distances participants and 
applicants must travel. This shall include at least one of the following 
procedures: Appointment scheduling, adjustment of clinic hours and/or 
locations, or the mailing of food instruments, provided, however, that 
all State agencies shall include appointment scheduling for employed 
adult individuals applying or reapplying for themselves or on behalf of 
others if such appointments are not currently provided. The State agency 
shall also describe any plans for issuance of food instruments to 
employed or rural participants, or to any other segment of the 
participant population, through means other than direct participant 
pick-up, pursuant to Sec. 246.12(r)(8). Such description shall also 
include measures to ensure the integrity of program services and fiscal 
accountability.
    (22) Assurance that each local agency and any subgrantees of the 
State agency and/or local agencies are in compliance with the 
requirements of 7 CFR part 3017 regarding nonprocurement debarment/
suspension.
    (23) A description of the State agency's plans to provide and 
maintain a drug-free workplace.
    (b) Public comment. The State agency shall establish a procedure 
under which members of the general public are provided an opportunity to 
comment on the development of the State agency plan.
    (c) Amendments. At any time after approval, the State agency may 
amend the State Plan to reflect changes. The State agency shall submit 
the amendments to FCS for approval. The amendments shall be signed by 
the State designated official responsible for ensuring that the Program 
is operated in accordance with the State Plan.
    (d) Retention of copy. A copy of the approved State Plan or the WIC 
portion of the State's composite plan of operations shall be kept on 
file at the State agency for public inspection.

[50 FR 6121, Feb. 13, 1985, as amended at 52 FR 21236, June 4, 1987; 53 
FR 25314, July 6, 1988; 54 FR 51294, Dec. 14, 1989; 55 FR 9717, Mar. 15, 
1990; 57 FR 34506, Aug. 5, 1992; 58 FR 11506, Feb. 26, 1993; 59 FR 
11499, Mar. 11, 1994]

[[Page 275]]


<R05>
Sec. 246.5  Selection of local agencies.

    (a) General. This section sets forth the procedures the State agency 
shall perform in the selection of local agencies and the expansion, 
reduction, and disqualification of local agencies already in operation. 
In making decisions to intitiate, continue, and discontinue the 
participation of local agencies, the State agency shall give 
consideration to the need for Program benefits as delineated in the 
Affirmative Action Plan.
    (b) Application of local agencies. The State agency shall require 
each agency, including subdivisions of the State agency, which desires 
approval as a local agency, to submit a written local agency 
application. Within 15 days after receipt of an incomplete application, 
the State agency shall provide written notification to the applicant 
agency of the additional information needed. Within 30 days after 
receipt of a complete application, the State agency shall notify the 
applicant agency in writing of the approval or disapproval of its 
application. When an application is disapproved, the State agency shall 
advise the applicant agency of the reasons for disapproval and of the 
right to appeal as set forth in Sec. 246.18. When an agency submits an 
application and there are no funds to serve the area, the applicant 
agency shall be notified within 30 days of receipt of the application 
that there are currently no funds available for Program initiation or 
expansion. The applicant agency shall be notified by the State agency 
when funds become available.
    (c) Program initiation and expansion. The State agency shall meet 
the following requirements concerning Program initiation and expansion:
    (1) The State agency shall fund local agencies serving those areas 
or special populations most in need first, in accordance with their 
order of priority as listed in the Affirmative Action Plan described in 
Sec. 246.4(a)(5). The selection criteria cited in paragraph (d)(1) of 
this section shall be applied to each area or special population before 
eliminating that area from consideration and serving the next area of 
special population. The State agency shall consider the number of 
participants in each priority level being served by existing local 
agencies in determining when it is appropriate to move into additional 
areas in the Affirmative Action Plan or to expand existing operations in 
an area. Additionally, the State agency shall consider the total number 
of people potentially eligible in each area compared to the number being 
served. Expansion of existing operations shall be in accordance with the 
Affirmative Action Plan and may be based on the percentage of need being 
met in each participant priority level.
    (2) The State agency shall provide a written justification to FCS 
for not funding an agency to serve the highest priority area or special 
population. Such justification may include its inability to administer 
the Program, lack of interest expressed for operating the Program, or 
for those areas or special populations which are under consideration for 
expansion of an existing operation, a determination by the State agency 
that there is a greater need for funding an agency serving an area or 
special population not operating the Program. The State agency shall use 
the participant priority system in Sec. 246.7 as a measurement of 
greater need in such determination.
    (3) The State agency may fund more than one local agency to serve 
the same area or special population as long as more than one local 
agency is necessary to serve the full extent of need in that area or 
special population.
    (d) Local agency priority system. The State agency shall establish 
standards for the selection of new local agencies. Such standards shall 
include the following considerations:
    (1) The State agency shall consider the following priority system, 
which is based on the relative availability of health and administrative 
services, in the selection of local agencies:
    (i) First consideration shall be given to a public or a private 
nonprofit health agency that will provide ongoing, routine pediatric and 
obstetric care and administrative services.
    (ii) Second consideration shall be given to a public or a private 
nonprofit health or human service agency that will enter into a written 
agreement with another agency for either ongoing, routine pediatric and 
obstetric care or administrative services.

[[Page 276]]

    (iii) Third consideration shall be given to a public or private 
nonprofit health agency that will enter into a written agreement with 
private physicians, licensed by the State, in order to provide ongoing, 
routine pediatric and obstetric care to a specific category of 
participants (women, infants or children).
    (iv) Fourth consideration shall be given to a public or private 
nonprofit human service agency that will enter into a written agreement 
with private physicians, licensed by the State, to provide ongoing, 
routine pediatric and obstetric care.
    (v) Fifth consideration shall be given to a public or private 
nonprofit health or human service agency that will provide ongoing, 
routine pediatric and obstetric care through referral to a health 
provider.
    (2) When seeking new local agencies, the State agency shall publish 
a notice in the media of the area next in line according to the 
Affirmative Action Plan, unless the State agency has received an 
application from a public or nonprofit private health agency in that 
area which can provide adequate health and administrative services. The 
notice shall include a brief explanation of the Program, a description 
of the local agency priority system cited in this paragraph and a 
request that potential local agencies notify the State agency of their 
interest. In addition, the State agency shall contact all potential 
local agencies in the area to ensure that they are aware of the 
opportunity to apply for participation under the Program. If no agency 
submits an application within 30 days, the State agency may then proceed 
with the selection of a local agency in the area next in line according 
to the Affirmative Action Plan. If sufficient funds are available, a 
State agency shall give notice and consider applications in more than 
one area at the same time but shall fund new local agencies in 
conformance with the sequential ranking of the Affirmative Action Plan.
    (e) Disqualification of local agencies. (1) The State agency may 
disqualify a local agency--
    (i) When the State agency determines noncompliance with Program 
regulations;
    (ii) When the State's Program funds are insufficient to support the 
continued operation of all its existing local agencies at their current 
participation level; or
    (iii) When the State agency determines, following a review of local 
agency credentials in accordance with paragraph (f) of this section, 
that another local agency can operate the Program more effectively and 
efficiently.
    (2) The State agency may establish its own criteria for 
disqualification of local agencies. The State agency shall notify the 
local agency of any State-established criteria. In addition to any State 
established criteria, the State agency shall consider, at a minimum--
    (i) The availability of other community resources to participants 
and the cost efficiency and cost effectiveness of the local agency in 
terms of both food and nutrition services and administration costs;
    (ii) The percentages of participants in each priority level being 
served by the local agency and the percentage of need being met in each 
participant category;
    (iii) The relative position of the area or special population served 
by the local agency in the Affirmative Action Plan;
    (iv) The local agency's place in the priority system in paragraph 
(d)(1) of this section; and
    (v) The capability of another local agency or agencies to accept the 
local agency's participants.
    (3) When disqualifying a local agency under the Program, the State 
agency shall--
    (i) Make every effort to transfer affected participants to another 
local agency without disruption of benefits;
    (ii) Provide the affected local agency with written notice not less 
than 60 days in advance of the pending action which includes an 
explanation of the reasons for disqualification, the date of 
disqualification, and, except in cases of the expiration of a local 
agency's agreement, the local agency's right to appeal as set forth in 
Sec. 246.18; and
    (iii) Ensure that the action is not in conflict with any existing 
written agreements between the State and the local agency.

[[Page 277]]

    (f) Periodic review of local agency qualifications. The State agency 
may conduct periodic reviews of the qualifications of authorized local 
agencies under its jurisdiction. Based upon the results of such reviews 
the State agency may make appropriate adjustments among the 
participating local agencies, including the disqualification of a local 
agency when the State agency determines that another local agency can 
operate the Program more effectively and efficiently. In conducting such 
reviews, the State agency shall consider the factors listed in paragraph 
(e)(2) of this section in addition to whatever criteria it may develop. 
The State agency shall implement the procedures established in paragraph 
(e)(3) of this section when disqualifying a local agency.

[50 FR 6121, Feb. 13, 1985; 50 FR 8098, Feb. 28, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 246.6  Agreements with local agencies.

    (a) Signed written agreements. The State agency shall enter into a 
signed written agreement with each local agency, including subdivisions 
of the State agency, which sets forth the local agency's 
responsibilities for Program operations as prescribed in this part. 
Copies of the agreement shall be kept on file at both the State and 
local agencies for purposes of review and audit in accordance with 
Secs. 246.19 and 246.20. Neither the State agency nor the local agency 
has an obligation to renew the agreement. The expiration of an agreement 
is not subject to appeal. The State agency shall provide local agencies 
with advance written notice of the expiration of an agreement as 
required under Secs. 246.5(e)(3)(ii) and 246.18(b)(1).
    (b) Provisions of agreement. The agreement between the State agency 
and each local agency shall ensure that the local agency--
    (1) Complies with all the fiscal and operational requirements 
prescribed by the State agency pursuant to this part, 7 CFR part 3016, 
the debarment and suspension requirements of 7 CFR part 3017, if 
applicable, the lobbying restrictions of 7 CFR part 3018, and FCS 
guidelines and instructions, and provides on a timely basis to the State 
agency all required information regarding fiscal and Program 
information;
    (2) Has a competent professional authority on the staff of the local 
agency and the capabilities necessary to perform the certification 
procedures;
    (3) Makes available appropriate health services to participants and 
informs applicants of the health services which are available;
    (4) Has a plan for continued efforts to make health services 
available to participants at the clinic or through written agreements 
with health care providers when health services are provided through 
referral;
    (5) Provides nutrition education services to participants, in 
compliance with Sec. 246.11 and FCS guidelines and instructions;
    (6) Implements a food delivery system prescribed by the State agency 
pursuant to Sec. 246.12 and approved by FCS;
    (7) Maintains complete, accurate, documented and current accounting 
of all Program funds received and expended;
    (8) Maintains on file and has available for review, audit, and 
evaluation all criteria used for certification, including information on 
the area served, income standards used, and specific criteria used to 
determine nutritional risk; and
    (9) Does not discriminate against persons on the grounds of race, 
color, national origin, age, sex or handicap; and compiles data, 
maintains records and submits reports as required to permit effective 
enforcement of the nondiscrimination laws.
    (c) Indian agencies. Each Indian State agency shall ensure that all 
local agencies under its jurisdiction serve primarily Indian 
populations.
    (d) Health and human service agencies. When a health agency and a 
human service agency comprise the local agency, both agencies shall 
together meet all the requirements of this part and shall enter into a 
written agreement which outlines all Program responsibilities of each 
agency. The agreement shall be approved by the State agency during the 
application process and shall be on file at both the State and local 
agency. No Program funds shall be used to reimburse the health agency

[[Page 278]]

for the health services provided. However, costs of certification borne 
by the health agency may be reimbursed.
    (e) Health or human service agencies and private physicians. When a 
health or human service agency and private physician(s) comprise the 
local agency, all parties shall together meet all of the requirements of 
this part and shall enter into a written agreement which outlines the 
inter-related Program responsibilities between the physician(s) and the 
local agency. The agreement shall be approved by the State agency during 
the application process and shall be on file at both agencies. The local 
agency shall advise the State agency on its application of the name(s) 
and address(es) of the private physician(s) participating and obtain 
State agency approval of the written agreement. A competent professional 
authority on the staff of the health or human service agency shall be 
responsible for the certification of participants. No Program funds 
shall be used to reimburse the private physician(s) for the health 
services provided. However, costs of certification data provided by the 
physician(s) may be reimbursed.
    (f) Outreach/Certification In Hospitals. The State agency shall 
ensure that each local agency operating the program within a hospital 
and/or that has a cooperative arrangement with a hospital:
    (1) Advises potentially eligible individuals that receive inpatient 
or outpatient prenatal, maternity, or postpartum services, or that 
accompany a child under the age of 5 who receives well-child services, 
of the availability of program services; and
    (2) To the extent feasible, provides an opportunity for individuals 
who may be eligible to be certified within the hospital for 
participation in the WIC Program.

[50 FR 6121, Feb. 13, 1985, as amended at 59 FR 11500, Mar. 11, 1994]


<R04>
                   Subpart C--Participant Eligibility


<R05>
Sec. 246.7  Certification of participants.

    (a) Integration with health services. To lend administrative 
efficiency and participant convenience to the certification process, 
whenever possible, Program intake procedures shall be combined with 
intake procedures for other health programs or services administered by 
the State and local agencies. Such merging may include verification 
procedures, certification interviews, and income computations. Local 
agencies shall maintain and make available for distribution to all 
pregnant, postpartum, and breastfeeding women and to parents or 
caretakers of infants and children applying for and participating in the 
Program a list of local resources for drug and other harmful substance 
abuse counseling and treatment.
    (b) Program referral and access. State and local agencies shall 
provide WIC Program applicants and participants or their designated 
proxies with information on other health-related and public assistance 
programs, and when appropriate, shall refer applicants and participants 
to such programs.
    (1) The State agency shall ensure that written information 
concerning the Food Stamp Program, the program for Aid to Families with 
Dependent Children under Title IV-A of the Social Security Act (AFDC), 
and the Child Support Enforcement Program under Title IV-D of the Social 
Security Act, is provided on at least one occasion to adult participants 
and adult individuals applying for the WIC Program for themselves or on 
behalf of others.
    (2) The State agency shall provide each local WIC agency with 
materials showing the maximum income limits, according to family size, 
applicable to pregnant women, infants, and children up to age 5 under 
the medical assistance program established under Title XIX of the Social 
Security Act (in this section, referred to as the ``Medicaid Program''). 
The local agency shall, in turn, provide to adult individuals applying 
or reapplying for the WIC Program for themselves or on behalf of others, 
written information about the Medicaid Program. If such individuals are 
not currently participating in Medicaid but appear to have family income 
below the applicable maximum income limits for the program, the local 
agency shall also refer these individuals to Medicaid, including the 
referral of infants and children to the appropriate entity in the area 
authorized to determine eligibility for early and periodic

[[Page 279]]

screening, diagnostic, and treatment (EPSDT) services, and, the referral 
of pregnant women to the appropriate entity in the area authorized to 
determine presumptive eligibility for the Medicaid Program, if such 
determinations are being offered by the State.
    (3) Local agencies shall provide information about other potential 
sources of food assistance in the local area to adult individuals 
applying or reapplying in person for the WIC Program for themselves or 
on behalf of others, when such applicants cannot be served because the 
Program is operating at capacity in the local area.
    (4) Each local agency that does not routinely schedule appointments 
shall schedule appointments for employed adult individuals seeking to 
apply or reapply for participation in the WIC Program for themselves or 
on behalf of others so as to minimize the time such individuals are 
absent from the workplace due to such application.
    (5) Each local agency shall attempt to contact each pregnant woman 
who misses her first appointment to apply for participation in the 
Program in order to reschedule the appointment. At the time of initial 
contact, the local agency shall request an address and telephone number 
where the pregnant woman can be reached.
    (c) Eligibility criteria. To be certified as eligible for the 
Program, infants, children, and pregnant, postpartum, and breastfeeding 
women shall:
    (1) In all State agencies except for Indian State agencies, meet the 
requirement that the applicant reside within the jurisdiction of the 
State. Indian State agencies may establish the requirement that 
applicants reside within their jurisdiction. All State agencies may 
determine a service area for any local agency, and may require that an 
applicant reside within the service area. However, the State agency may 
not use length of residency as an eligibility requirement.
    (2) Meet the income criteria specified in paragraph (d) of this 
section.
    (3) Meet the nutritional risk criteria specified in paragraph (e) of 
this section.
    (d) Income criteria and income eligibility determinations. The State 
agency shall establish, and provide local agencies with, income 
guidelines, definitions, and procedures to be used in determining an 
applicant's income eligibility for the Program.
    (1) Income eligibility guidelines. The State agency may prescribe 
income guidelines either equaling the income guidelines established 
under section 9 of the National School Lunch Act for reduced-price 
school meals or identical to State or local guidelines for free or 
reduced-price health care. However, in conforming Program income 
guidelines to health care guidelines, the State agency shall not 
establish Program guidelines which exceed the guidelines for reduced-
price school meals or are less than 100 percent of the revised poverty 
income guidelines issued annually by the Department of Health and Human 
Services. Program applicants who meet the requirements established by 
paragraph (d)(2)(vi)(A) of this section shall not be subject to the 
income limits established by State agencies under this paragraph.
    (i) Local agency income eligibility guidelines. Different guidelines 
may be prescribed for different local agencies within the State provided 
that the guidelines are the ones used by the local agencies for 
determining eligibility for free or reduced-price health care.
    (ii) Annual adjustments in the income guidelines. On or before June 
1 each year, FCS will announce adjustments in the income guidelines for 
reduced-price meals under section 9 of the National School Lunch Act, 
based on annual adjustments in the revised poverty income guidelines 
issued by the Department of Health and Human Services.
    (iii) Implementation of the income guidelines. On or before July 1 
each year, each State agency shall announce and transmit to each local 
agency the State agency's family size income guidelines unless changes 
in the poverty income guidelines issued by the Department of Health and 
Human Services do not necessitate changes in the State or local agency's 
income guidelines. The State agency shall ensure that conforming 
adjustments are made, if necessary, in local agency income guidelines. 
The local agency shall

[[Page 280]]

implement (revised) guidelines effective July 1 of each year for which 
such guidelines are issued by the State.
    (2) Income eligibility determinations. The State agency shall ensure 
that local agencies determine income through the use of a clear and 
simple application form provided or approved by the State agency.
    (i) Timeframes for determining income. In determining the income 
eligibility of an applicant, the State agency may instruct local 
agencies to consider the income of the family during the past 12 months 
and the family's current rate of income to determine which indicator 
more accurately reflects the family's status. However, persons from 
families with adult members who are unemployed shall be eligible based 
on income during the period of unemployment if the loss of income causes 
the current rate of income to be less than the State or local agency's 
income guidelines for Program eligibility.
    (ii) Definition of ``Income''. If the State agency uses the National 
School Lunch reduced-priced meal income guidelines, as specified in 
paragraph (d)(1) of this section, it shall use the following definition 
of income: Income for the purposes of this part means gross cash income 
before deductions for income taxes, employees' social security taxes, 
insurance premiums, bonds, etc. Income includes the following--
    (A) Monetary compensation for services, including wages, salary, 
commissions, or fees;
    (B) Net income from farm and non-farm self-employment;
    (C) Social Security benefits;
    (D) Dividends or interest on savings or bonds, income from estates 
or trusts, or net rental income;
    (E) Public assistance or welfare payments;
    (F) Unemployment compensation;
    (G) Government civilian employee or military retirement or pensions 
or veterans' payments;
    (H) Private pensions or annuities;
    (I) Alimony or child support payments;
    (J) Regular contributions from persons not living in the household;
    (K) Net royalties; and
    (L) Other cash income. Other cash income includes, but is not 
limited to, cash amounts received or withdrawn from any source including 
savings, investments, trust accounts and other resources which are 
readily available to the family.
    (iii) Use of a State or local health care definition of ``Income''. 
If the State agency uses State or local free or reduced-price health 
care income guidelines, as it is authorized to do in paragraph (d)(1) of 
this section, it may use the State or local definition or definitions of 
income used for the health care eligibility determinations. The State 
agency shall ensure, however, that the State or local agency's 
definition of income does not count the value of in-kind housing and 
other in-kind benefits and payments or benefits listed in paragraph 
(d)(2)(iv) of this section as income for Program purposes, and that 
families with gross income, as defined in paragraph (d)(2)(ii) of this 
section, in excess of 185 percent of the Federal guidelines specified 
under paragraph (d)(1) of this section are not rendered eligible for 
Program benefits, except that persons who meet the requirements of 
paragraph (d)(2)(vi) of this section shall not be subject to limitations 
established under this paragraph.
    (iv) Income exclusions. (A) In determining income eligibility, the 
State agency may exclude from consideration as income any basic 
allowance for quarters received by military services personnel residing 
off military installations. State agencies which choose to exercise this 
option shall implement it uniformly with respect to all Program 
applicants from military families.
    (B) The value of inkind housing and other inkind benefits, shall be 
excluded from consideration as income in determining an applicant's 
eligibility for the program.
    (C) Payments or benefits provided under certain Federal programs or 
acts are excluded from consideration as income by legislative 
prohibition. The payments or benefits which must be excluded from 
consideration as income include, but are not limited to:
    (1) Reimbursements from the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real 
Property Acquisition Policies Act of

[[Page 281]]

1970 (Pub. L. 91-646, sec. 216, 42 U.S.C. 4636);
    (2) Any payment to volunteers under Title I (VISTA and others) and 
Title II (RSVP, foster grandparents, and others) of the Domestic 
Volunteer Service Act of 1973 (Pub. L. 93-113, sec. 404(g), 42 U.S.C. 
5044(g)) to the extent excluded by that Act;
    (3) Payment to volunteers under section 8(b)(1)(B) of the Small 
Business Act (SCORE and ACE) (Pub. L. 95-510, sec. 101, 15 U.S.C. 
637(b)(1)(D));
    (4) Income derived from certain submarginal land of the United 
States which is held in trust for certain Indian tribes (Pub. L. 94-114, 
sec. 6, 25 U.S.C. 459e);
    (5) Payments received under the Job Training Partnership Act (Pub. 
L. 97-300, sec. 142(b), 29 U.S.C. 1552(b));
    (6) Income derived from the disposition of funds to the Grand River 
Band of Ottawa Indians (Pub. L. 94-540, sec. 6);
    (7) Payments received under the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act 
(Pub. L. 100-241, sec. 15, 43 U.S.C. sec. 1626(c));
    (8) The value of assistance to children or their families under the 
National School Lunch Act, as amended (Pub. L. 94-105, sec. 9(d), 42 
U.S.C. sec. 1760(e)), the Child Nutrition Act of 1966 (Pub. L. 89-642, 
sec. 11(b), 42 U.S.C. sec. 1780(b)), and the Food Stamp Act of 1977 
(Pub. L. 95-113, sec. 1301, 7 U.S.C. sec. 2017(b));
    (9) Payments by the Indian Claims Commission to the Confederated 
Tribes and Bands of the Yakima Indian Nation or the Apache Tribe of the 
Mescalero Reservation (Pub. L. 95-433, sec. 2, 25 U.S.C. 609c-1);
    (10) Payments to the Passamaquoddy Tribe and the Penobscot Nation or 
any of their members received pursuant to the Maine Indian Claims 
Settlement Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-420, sec. 6, 9(c), 25 U.S.C. 1725(i), 
1728(c));
    (11) Payments under the Low-income Home Energy Assistance Act, as 
amended (Pub. L. 99-125, sec. 504(c), 42 U.S.C. sec. 8624(f));
    (12) Student financial assistance received from any program funded 
in whole or part under Title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965, 
including the Pell Grant, Supplemental Educational Opportunity Grant, 
State Student Incentive Grants, National Direct Student Loan, PLUS, 
College Work Study, and Byrd Honor Scholarship programs, which is used 
for costs described in section 472 (1) and (2) of that Act (Pub. L. 99-
498, section 479B, 20 U.S.C. 1087uu). The specified costs set forth in 
section 472 (1) and (2) of the Higher Education Act are tuition and fees 
normally assessed a student carrying the same academic workload as 
determined by the institution, and including the costs for rental or 
purchase of any equipment, materials, or supplies required of all 
students in the same course of study; and an allowance for books, 
supplies, transportation, and miscellaneous personal expenses for a 
student attending the institution on at least a half-time basis, as 
determined by the institution. The specified costs set forth in section 
472 (1) and (2) of the Act are those costs which are related to the 
costs of attendance at the educational institution and do not include 
room and board and dependent care expenses;
    (13) Payments under the Disaster Relief Act of 1974, as amended by 
the Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Amendments of 1989 (Pub. L. 
100-707, sec. 105(i), 42 U.S.C. sec. 5155(d));
    (14) Effective July 1, 1991, payments received under the Carl D. 
Perkins Vocational Education Act, as amended by the Carl D. Perkins 
Vocational and Applied Technology Education Act Amendments of 1990 (Pub. 
L. 101-392, sec. 501, 20 U.S.C. sec. 2466d);
    (15) Payments pursuant to the Agent Orange Compensation Exclusion 
Act (Pub. L. 101-201, sec. 1);
    (16) Payments received for Wartime Relocation of Civilians under the 
Civil Liberties Act of 1988 (Pub. L. 100-383, sec. 105(f)(2), 50 App. 
U.S.C. sec. 1989b-4(f)(2));
    (17) Value of any child care payments made under section 
402(g)(1)(E) of the Social Security Act, as amended by the Family 
Support Act (Pub. L. 100-485, sec. 301, 42 U.S.C. sec. 602 (g)(1)(E));
    (18) Value of any ``at-risk'' block grant child care payments made 
under section 5081 of Pub. L. 101-508, which amended section 402(i) of 
the Social Security Act;

[[Page 282]]

    (19) Value of any child care provided or paid for under the Child 
Care and Development Block Grant Act, as amended (Pub. L. 102-586, Sec. 
8(b)), 42 U.S.C. 9858q);
    (20) Mandatory salary reduction amount for military service 
personnel which is used to fund the Veteran's Educational Assistance Act 
of 1984 (GI Bill), as amended (Pub. L. 99-576, sec. 303(a)(1), 38 U.S.C. 
sec. 1411 (b));
    (21) Payments received under the Old Age Assistance Claims 
Settlement Act, except for per capita shares in excess of $2,000 (Pub. 
L. 98-500, sec. 8, 25 U.S.C. sec. 2307);
    (22) Payments received under the Cranston-Gonzales National 
Affordable Housing Act, unless the income of the family equals or 
exceeds 80 percent of the median income of the area (Pub. L. 101-625, 
sec. 522(i)(4), 42 U.S.C. sec. 1437f nt);
    (23) Payments received under the Housing and Community Development 
Act of 1987, unless the income of the family increases at any time to 
not less than 50 percent of the median income of the area (Pub. L. 100-
242, sec. 126(c)(5)(A), 25 U.S.C. sec. 2307);
    (24) Payments received under the Sac and Fox Indian claims agreement 
(Pub. L. 94-189, sec. 6);
    (25) Payments received under the Judgment Award Authorization Act, 
as amended (Pub. L. 97-458, sec. 4, 25 U.S.C. sec. 1407 and Pub. L. 98-
64, sec. 2(b), 25 U.S.C. sec. 117b(b));
    (26) Payments for the relocation assistance of members of Navajo and 
Hopi Tribes (Pub. L. 93-531, sec. 22, 22 U.S.C. sec. 640d-21);
    (27) Payments to the Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewas, Arizona 
(Pub. L. 97-403, sec. 9);
    (28) Payments to the Blackfeet, Grosventre, and Assiniboine tribes 
(Montana) and the Papago (Arizona) (Pub. L. 97-408, sec. 8(d));
    (29) Payments to the Assiniboine Tribe of the Fort Belknap Indian 
community and the Assiniboine Tribe of the Fort Peck Indian Reservation 
(Montana) (Pub. L. 98-124, sec. 5);
    (30) Payments to the Red Lake Band of Chippewas (Pub. L. 98-123, 
sec. 3);
    (31) Payments received under the Saginaw Chippewa Indian Tribe of 
Michigan Distribution of Judgment Funds Act (Pub. L. 99-346, sec. 
6(b)(2)); and
    (32) Payments to the Chippewas of Mississippi (Pub. L. 99-377, sec. 
4(b)).
    (v) Verification of information. A State or local agency may require 
verification of information which it determines necessary to confirm 
income eligibility for Program benefits.
    (vi) Adjunct or automatic income eligibility. (A) The State agency 
shall accept as income-eligible for the Program any applicant who 
documents that he/she is:
    (1) Certified as fully eligible to receive food stamps under the 
Food Stamp Act of 1977, or certified as fully eligible, or presumptively 
eligible pending completion of the eligibility determination process, to 
receive Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) under Part A of 
Title IV of the Social Security Act or Medical Assistance (i.e., 
Medicaid) under Title XIX of the Social Security Act; or
    (2) A member of a family that is certified eligible to receive 
assistance under AFDC, or a member of a family in which a pregnant woman 
or an infant is certified eligible to receive assistance under Medicaid.
    (B) The State agency may accept, as evidence of income within 
Program guidelines, documentation of the applicant's participation in 
State-administered programs not specified in this paragraph that 
routinely require documentation of income, provided that those programs 
have income eligibility guidelines at or below the State agency's 
Program income guidelines.
    (C) Persons who are adjunctively income eligible, as set forth in 
paragraphs (d)(2)(vi)(A) of this section, shall not be subject to the 
income limits established under paragraph (d)(1) of this section.
    (vii) Income eligibility of Indian applicants. If an Indian State 
agency (or a non-Indian State agency which acts on behalf of a local 
agency operated by an Indian organization or the Indian Health Service) 
submits census data or other reliable documentation demonstrating to FCS 
that the majority of the Indian households in a local agency's service 
area have incomes at or below the State agency's income eligibility 
guidelines, FCS may authorize

[[Page 283]]

the State agency to approve the use of an income certification system 
under which the local Indian agency shall inform each Indian applicant 
household of the maximum family income allowed for that applicant's 
family size. The local agency shall ensure that the applicant, or the 
applicant's parent or caretaker, signs a statement that the applicant's 
family income does not exceed the maximum. The local agency may verify 
the income eligibility of any Indian applicant.
    (viii) Income eligibility of instream migrant farmworkers and their 
family members. Instream migrant farmworkers and their family members 
with expired Verification of Certification cards shall be declared to 
satisfy the State agency's income standard; Provided, however, that the 
income of that instream migrant farmworker family is determined at least 
once every 12 months. Any determination that members of an instream 
migrant farmworker family have met the income standard, either in the 
migrant's home base area before the migrant has entered the stream for a 
particular agricultural season, or in an instream area during the 
agricultural season, shall satisfy the income criteria in any State for 
any subsequent certification while the migrant is instream during the 
12-month period following the determination.
    (e) Nutritional risk. To be certified as eligible for the Program, 
applicants who meet the Program's eligibility standards specified in 
paragraph (c) of this section must be determined to be at nutritional 
risk. A competent professional authority on the staff of the local 
agency shall determine if a person is a nutritional risk through a 
medical and/or nutritional assessment. This determination may be based 
on referral data submitted by a competent professional authority not on 
the staff of the local agency.
    (1) Determination of nutritional risk. At a minimum, height or 
length and weight shall be measured, and a hematological test for anemia 
such as a hemoglobin, hematocrit, or free erythrocyte protoporphyrin 
test shall be performed. However, such hematological tests are not 
required for infants under six months of age and, at the State or local 
agency's discretion, the blood test is not required for children who 
were determined to be within the normal range at their last 
certification. However, the blood test shall be performed on such 
children at least once every 12 months. Height or length and weight 
measurements and, with the exceptions specified in this paragraph, blood 
tests, shall be obtained for all participants, including those who are 
determined at nutritional risk based solely on the established 
nutritional risk status of another person, as provided in paragraphs 
(e)(1)(i) and (e)(1)(ii) of this section. Weight and height or length 
shall be measured, and a blood test shall be conducted, not more than 60 
days prior to certification for program participation, provided that 
such data for persons certified as pregnant women shall be collected 
during their pregnancy, and such data for persons certified as 
postpartum and breastfeeding women shall be collected after the 
termination of their pregnancy.
    (i) A breastfeeding woman may be determined to be a nutritional risk 
if her breastfed infant has been determined to be a nutritional risk. A 
breastfed infant can be certified based on the mother's medical and/or 
nutritional assessment. A breastfeeding mother and her infant shall be 
placed in the highest priority level for which either is qualified.
    (ii) An infant under six months of age may be determined to be at 
nutritional risk if the infant's mother was a Program participant during 
pregnancy or of medical records document that the woman was at 
nutritional risk during pregnancy because of detrimental or abnormal 
nutritional conditions detectable by biochemical or anthropometric 
measurements or other documented nutritionally related medical 
conditions.
    (iii) A participant who has previously been certified eligible for 
the Program may be considered to be at nutritional risk in the next 
certification period if the competent professional authority determines 
there is a possibility of regression in nutritional status without the 
supplemental foods. The State agency may limit the number of times

[[Page 284]]

and circumstances under which a participant may be certified due to the 
possibility of regression.
    (2) Nutritional risk criteria. The following are examples of 
nutritional risk conditions which may be used as a basis for 
certification. These examples include--
    (i) Detrimental or abnormal nutritional conditions detectable by 
biochemical or anthropometric measurements, such as anemia, underweight, 
overweight, abnormal patterns of weight gain in a pregnant woman, low 
birth weight in an infant, or stunting in an infant or child;
    (ii) Other documented nutritionally related medical conditions, such 
as clinical signs of nutritional deficiencies, metabolic disorders, pre-
eclampsia in pregnant women, failure to thrive in an infant, chronic 
infections in any person, alcohol or drug abuse or mental retardation in 
women, lead poisoning, history of high risk pregnancies or factors 
associated with high risk pregnancies (such as smoking; conception 
before 16 months postpartum; history of low birth weight, premature 
births, or neonatal loss; adolescent pregnancy; or current multiple 
pregnancy) in pregnant women, or congenital malformations in infants or 
children, or infants born of women with alcohol or drug abuse histories 
or mental retardation.
    (iii) Dietary deficiencies that impair or endanger health, such as 
inadequate dietary patterns assessed by a 24-hour dietary recall, 
dietary history, or food frequency checklist; and
    (iv) Conditions that predispose persons to inadequate nutritional 
patterns or nutritionally related medical conditions, such as 
homelessness or migrancy.
    (3) Nutritional risk priorities. In determining nutritional risk, 
the State agency shall develop and include in its State Plan, specific 
risk conditions by priority level with indices for identifying these 
conditions. The criteria shall be used statewide and in accordance with 
the priority system as set forth in paragraph (e)(4) of this section.
    (4) Nutritional risk priority system. The competent professional 
authority shall fill vacancies which occur after a local agency has 
reached its maximum participation level by applying the following 
participant priority system to persons on the local agency's waiting 
list. Priorities I through VI shall be utilized in all States. The State 
agency may, at its discretion, expand the priority system to include 
Priority VII. The State agency may set income or other sub-priority 
levels within any of these seven priority levels. The State agency may 
expand Priority III, IV, or V to include high-risk postpartum women. The 
State agency may place pregnant or breastfeeding women and infants who 
are at nutritional risk solely because of homelessness or migrancy in 
Priority IV; children who are at nutritional risk solely because of 
homelessness or migrancy in Priority V; and postpartum women who are at 
nutritional risk solely because of homelessness or migrancy in Priority 
VI, OR, the State agency may place pregnant, breastfeeding or postpartum 
women, infants, and children who are at nutritional risk solely because 
of homelessness or migrancy in Priority VII.
    (i) Priority I. Pregnant women, breastfeeding women and infants at 
nutritional risk as demonstrated by hematological or anthropometric 
measurements, or other documented nutritionally related medical 
conditions which demonstrate the need for supplemental foods.
    (ii) Priority II. Except those infants who qualify for Priority I, 
infant up to six months of age of Program participants who participated 
during pregnancy, and infants up to six months of age born of women who 
were not Program participants during pregnancy but whose medical records 
document that they were at nutritional risk during pregnancy due to 
nutritional conditions detectable by biochemical or anthropometric 
measurements or other documented nutritionally related medical 
conditions which demonstrated the person's need for supplemental foods.
    (iii) Priority III. Children at nutritional risk as demonstrated by 
hematological or anthropometric measurements or other documented medical 
conditions which demonstrate the child's need for supplemental foods.
    (iv) Priority IV. Pregnant women, breastfeeding women, and infants 
at

[[Page 285]]

nutritional risk because of an inadequate dietary pattern.
    (v) Priority V. Children at nutritional risk because of an 
inadequate dietary pattern.
    (vi) Priority VI. Postpartum women at nutritional risk.
    (vii) Priority VII. Individuals certified for WIC solely due to 
homelessness or migrancy and, at State agency option, and in accordance 
with the provisions of paragraph (e)(1)(iii) of this section, previously 
certified participants who might regress in nutritional status without 
continued provision of supplemental foods.
    (f) Processing standards. The local agencies shall process 
applicants within the following timeframes:
    (1) Waiting lists. When the local agency is serving its maximum 
caseload, the local agency shall maintain a waiting list of individuals 
who visit the local agency to express interest in receiving Program 
benefits and who are likely to be served. However, in no case shall an 
applicant who requests placement on the waiting list be denied 
inclusion. State agencies may establish a policy which permits or 
requires local agencies to accept telephone requests for placement on 
the waiting list. The waiting list shall include the person's name, 
address or phone number, status (e.g., pregnant, breastfeeding, age of 
applicant), and the date he or she was placed on the waiting list. 
Individuals shall be notified of their placement on a waiting list 
within 20 days after they visit the local agency during clinic office 
hours to request Program benefits. For those State agencies establishing 
procedures to accept telephone requests for placement on a waiting list, 
individuals shall be notified of their placement on a waiting list 
within 20 days after contacting the local agency by phone. The competent 
professional authority shall apply the participant priority system as 
specified in paragraph (e)(4) of this section to the waiting list to 
ensure that the highest priority persons become Program participants 
first when caseload slots become available.
    (2) Timeframes for processing applicants. (i) When the local agency 
is not serving its maximum caseload, the local agency shall accept 
applications, make eligibility determinations, notify the applicants of 
the decisions made and, if the applicants are to be enrolled, issue food 
or food instruments. All of these actions shall be accomplished within 
the timeframes set forth below.
    (ii) The processing timeframes shall begin when the individual 
visits the local agency during clinic office hours to make an oral or 
written request for Program benefits. To ensure that accurate records 
are kept of the date of such requests, the local agency shall, at the 
time of each request, record the applicant's name, address and the date. 
The remainder of the information necessary to determine eligibility 
shall be obtained by the time of certification. Medical data taken prior 
to certification may be used as provided in paragraph (g)(4) of this 
section.
    (iii) The local agency shall act on applications within the 
following timeframes:
    (A) Special nutritional risk applicants shall be notified of their 
eligibility or ineligibility within 10 days of the date of the first 
request for Program benefits; except that State agencies may provide an 
extension of the notification period to a maximum of 15 days for those 
local agencies which make written request, including a justification of 
the need for an extension. The State agency shall establish criteria for 
identifying categories of persons at special nutritional risk who 
require expedited services. At a minimum, however, these categories 
shall include pregnant women eligible as Priority I participants, and 
migrant farmworkers and their family members who soon plan to leave the 
jurisdiction of the local agency.
    (B) All other applicants shall be notified of their eligibility or 
ineligibility within 20 days of the date of the first request for 
Program benefits.
    (iv) Each local agency using a retail purchase system shall issue a 
food instrument(s) to the participant at the same time as notification 
of certification. Such food instrument(s) shall provide benefits for the 
current month or the remaining portion thereof and shall be redeemable 
immediately upon

[[Page 286]]

receipt by the participant. Local agencies may mail the initial food 
instrument(s) with the notification of certification to those 
participants who meet the criteria for the receipt of food instruments 
through the mail, as provided in Sec. 246.12(r)(8).
    (v) Each local agency with a direct distribution or home delivery 
system shall issue the supplemental foods to the participant within 10 
days of issuing the notification of certification.
    (g) Certification periods. (1) Program benefits shall be based upon 
certifications established in accordance with the following timeframes:
    (i) Pregnant women shall be certified for the duration of their 
pregnancy and for up to six weeks postpartum.
    (ii) Postpartum women shall be certified for up to six months 
postpartum.
    (iii) Breastfeeding women shall be certified at intervals of 
approximately six months and ending with the breastfed infant's first 
birthday.
    (iv) Infants shall be certified at intervals of approximately six 
months, except that the State agency may permit local agencies under its 
jurisdiction to certify infants under six months of age for a period 
extending up to the first birthday provided the quality and 
accessibility of health care services are not diminished.
    (v) Children shall be certified at intervals of approximately six 
months and ending with the end of the month in which a child reaches the 
fifth birthday.
    (2) The State agency may authorize local agencies under its 
jurisdiction to establish shorter certification periods than outlined in 
paragraph (g)(1) of this section on a case-by-case basis. If the State 
agency exercises this option, it shall issue guidance for use by local 
agencies in establishing the shorter periods.
    (3) In cases where there is difficulty in appointment scheduling for 
persons referenced in paragraphs (g)(1) (iii), (iv) and (v) of this 
section, the certification period may be shortened or extended by a 
period not to exceed 30 days.
    (h) Actions affecting participation in mid-certification. (1) The 
State agency shall ensure that local agencies disqualify an individual 
during a certification period if, on the basis of a reassessment of 
Program eligibility status, the individual is determined ineligible; 
provided, however, that an individual determined adjunctively income 
eligible under paragraph (d)(2)(vi)(A) (1) or (2) of this section or 
income eligible under paragraph (d)(2)(vi)(B) of this section is not 
disqualified solely on the basis of a determination they no longer 
participate in AFDC, Medicaid, Food Stamps, or another qualified State-
administered program or are no longer a member of a family which 
contains an AFDC recipient or a pregnant woman or an infant receiving 
Medicaid. The State agency shall ensure that local agencies disqualify 
such an individual during a certification period, if on the basis of a 
reassessment of Program eligibility, the individual is no longer deemed 
income eligible under paragraph (d)(2)(vi) (A) or (B) of this section 
and does not meet the income eligibility requirements of paragraph 
(d)(1) of this section. The State agency may authorize local agencies to 
disqualify an individual during the certification period for the 
following reasons:
    (i) Participant abuse, including, but not limited to the infractions 
listed in Sec. 246.12(k)(2); or
    (ii) Failure to obtain food instruments or supplemental foods for a 
number of consecutive months, as specified by the State agency, 
evidenced by indicators such as failure to pick up supplemental foods or 
food instruments, nonreceipt of food instruments as evidenced by return 
of mailed instruments, or failure to have an electronic benefit transfer 
card revalidated to authorize the purchase of supplemental foods.
    (2) If a State agency experiences funding shortages, it may be 
necessary to discontinue Program benefits to a number of certified 
participants. Such action may be taken only after the State agency has 
explored alternative actions. If taken, the action should affect the 
least possible number of participants and should affect participants 
whose nutritional and health status would be least impaired by 
withdrawal of Program benefits. The State may discontinue benefits by--
    (i) Disqualifying a group of participants; and/or

[[Page 287]]

    (ii) Withholding benefits of a group with the expectation of 
providing benefits again when funds are available.
    (3) When a State agency elects to discontinue benefits to a number 
of certified participants due to insufficient funds for a period of 
time, it shall not enroll new participants during that period.
    (i) Certification forms. All certification data for each person 
certified shall be recorded on a form (or forms) which are provided by 
the State agency. The information on the forms shall include--
    (1) Name and address;
    (2) Date of initial visit to apply for participation;
    (3) Information regarding income eligibility for the Program as 
specified in paragraph (d) of this section;
    (4) The date of certification and the date nutritional risk data 
were taken if different from the date of certification;
    (5) Height or length, weight, and hematological test results;
    (6) The specific nutritional risk conditions which established 
eligibility for the supplemental foods. Documentation should include 
health history when appropriate to the nutritional risk condition, with 
the applicant's or applicant's parent's or caretaker's consent;
    (7) The signature and title of the competent professional authority 
making the nutritional risk determination, and, if different, the 
signature and title of the administrative person responsible for 
determining income eligibility under the Program; and
    (8) The following statement with a space for the signature of the 
applicant, parent, or caretake to sign after reading or being read the 
following statement:

    I have been advised of my rights and obligations under the Program. 
I certify that the information I have provided for my eligibility 
determination is correct, to the best of my knowledge. This 
certification form is being submitted in connection with the receipt of 
Federal assistance. Program officials may verify information on this 
form. I understand that intentionally making a false or misleading 
statement or intentionally misrepresenting, concealing, or withholding 
facts may result in paying the State agency, in cash, the value of the 
food benefits improperly issued to me and may subject me to civil or 
criminal prosecution under State and Federal law.

    (9) In States exercising the authority to disclose information 
pursuant to Sec. 246.26(d)(2), a statement, to be added to the statement 
required under paragraph (i)(8) of this section, acknowledging that the 
chief State health officer (or in the case of Indian State agencies, the 
governing authority) may authorize disclosure of information provided by 
the applicant or participant to representatives of public organizations, 
designated by such chief State officer or governing authority, which 
administer health or welfare programs that serve persons categorically 
eligible for the WIC Program. This statement shall also indicate that 
such information can be used by the recipient organizations only to 
determine the eligibility of WIC applicants and participants for 
programs administered by such organizations, and to conduct outreach for 
such programs.
    (j) Notification of participant rights and responsibilities. In 
order to inform applicants and participants or their parents or 
caretakers of Program rights and responsibilities, the following 
information shall be provided. Where a significant number or proportion 
of the population eligible to be served needs the information in a 
language other than English, reasonable steps shall be taken to provide 
the information in appropriate languages to such persons, considering 
the scope of the Program and the size and concentration of such 
population.
    (1) During the certification procedure, every Program applicant, 
parent or caretaker shall be informed of the illegality of dual 
participation.
    (2) At the time of certification, each Program participant, parent 
or caretaker shall read, or have read to him or her, the statement 
provided in paragraph (i)(8) of this section and the following 
sentences:
    (i) ``Standards for eligibility and participation in the WIC Program 
are the same for everyone, regardless of race, color, national origin, 
age, handicap, or sex.''
    (ii) ``You may appeal any decision made by the local agency 
regarding your eligibility for the Program.''

[[Page 288]]

    (iii) ``The local agency will make health services and nutrition 
education available to you, and you are encouraged to participate in 
these services.''
    (3) If the State agency implements the policy of disqualifying a 
participant for not picking up supplemental foods or food instruments in 
accordance with paragraph (h)(1)(ii) of this section, it shall provide 
notice of this policy and of the importance of regularly picking up food 
instruments or supplemental foods to each participant, parent or 
caretaker at the time of each certification.
    (4) At least during the initial certification visit, each 
participant, parent or caretaker shall receive an explanation of how the 
local food delivery system operates and shall be advised of the types of 
health services available, where they are located, how they may be 
obtained and why they may be useful.
    (5) Persons found ineligible for the Program during a certification 
visit shall be advised in writing of the ineligibility, of the reasons 
for the ineligibility, and of the right to a fair hearing. The reasons 
for ineligibility shall be properly documented and shall be retained on 
file at the local agency.
    (6) A person who is about to be suspended or disqualified from 
program participation at any time during the certification period shall 
be advised in writing not less than 15 days before the suspension or 
disqualification. Such notification shall include the reasons for this 
action, and the participant's right to a fair hearing. Further, such 
notification need not be provided to persons who will be disqualified 
for not picking up supplemental foods or food instruments in accordance 
with paragraph (h)(1)(ii) of this section.
    (7) When a State or local agency pursues collection of a claim 
pursuant to Sec. 246.23(c) against an individual who has been improperly 
issued benefits, the person shall be advised in writing of the reason(s) 
for the claim, the value of the improperly issued benefits which must be 
repaid, and of the right to a fair hearing.
    (8) Each participant, parent or caretaker shall be notified not less 
than 15 days before the expiration of each certification period that 
certification for the Program is about to expire.
    (9) If a State agency must suspend or terminate benefits to any 
participant during the participant's certification period due to a 
shortage of funds for the Program, it shall issue a notice to such 
participant in advance, as stipulated in paragraph (j)(6) of this 
section. Such notice shall also include the categories of participants 
whose benefits are being suspended or terminated due to such shortage.
    (k) Transfer of certification. (1) Each State agency shall ensure 
issuance of a Verification of Certification card to every participant 
who is a member of a family in which there is a migrant farmworker or 
any other participant who is likely to be relocating during the 
certification period. Certifying local agencies shall ensure that 
Verification of Certification cards are fully completed.
    (2) The State agency shall require the receiving local agency to 
accept Verification of Certification cards from participants, including 
participants who are migrant farmworkers or members of their families, 
who have been participating in the Program in another local agency 
within or outside of the jurisdiction of the State agency. A person with 
a valid Verification of Certification card shall not be denied 
participation in the receiving State because the person does not meet 
that State's particular eligibility criteria.
    (3) The Verification of Certification card is valid until the 
certification period expires, and shall be accepted as proof of 
eligibility for Program benefits. If the receiving local agency has 
waiting lists for participation, the transferring participant shall be 
placed on the list ahead of all waiting applicants.
    (4) The Verification of Certification card shall include the name of 
the participant, the date the certification was performed, the date 
income eligibility was last determined, the nutritional risk condition 
of the participant, the date the certification period expires, the 
signature and printed or typed name of the certifying local agency 
official, the name and address of the certifying local agency and an 
identification number or some other means of

[[Page 289]]

accountability. The Verification of Certification card shall be uniform 
throughout the jurisdiction of the State agency.
    (l) Dual participation. (1) The State agency shall be responsible 
for the following:
    (i) In conjunction with the local agency, the prevention and 
detection of dual participation within each local agency and between 
local agencies.
    (ii) In areas where local agency serves the same population as an 
Indian State agency or a CSFP agency, entering into an agreement with 
the CSFP or Indian State agency for the detection and prevention of dual 
participation. The agreement must be made prior to operation within the 
same area and must be in writing.
    (iii) Immediate disqualification from one of the programs or clinics 
for participants found in violation due to dual participation. Where 
deliberate misrepresentation is involved, the participant may be 
disqualifed from participation in both programs or clinics as specified 
in Sec. 246.12(k)(2).
    (2) At certification, and when issuing food or food instruments, the 
local agency shall check the identification of each participant. For an 
infant or child participant, an immunization record, birth certificate, 
or other records that local agency personnel consider adequate to 
establish identity, shall be acceptable.
    (m) Certification without charge. The certification procedure shall 
be performed at no cost to the applicant.
    (n) Certification of persons in homeless facilities and 
institutions. (1) Pregnant, breastfeeding, and postpartum women, infants 
or children who meet the requirements of paragraph (c) of this section, 
and who reside in a homeless facility, shall be considered eligible for 
the Program and shall be treated equally with all other eligible 
applicants at the local agency where they apply for WIC benefits, 
Provided that: the State or local agency has taken reasonable steps to:
    (i) Establish, to the extent practicable, that the homeless facility 
meets the following conditions with respect to resident WIC 
participants:
    (A) The homeless facility does not accrue financial or in-kind 
benefit from a person's participation in the Program, e.g., by reducing 
its expenditures for food service because its residents are receiving 
WIC foods;
    (B) Foods provided by the WIC Program are not subsumed into a 
communal food service, but are available exclusively to the WIC 
participant for whom they were issued;
    (C) The homeless facility places no constraints on the ability of 
the participant to partake of the supplemental foods and nutrition 
education available under the Program;
    (ii) Contact the homeless facility periodically to ensure continued 
compliance with these conditions; and
    (iii) Request the homeless facility to notify the State or local 
agency if it ceases to meet any of these conditions.
    (2) The State agency may authorize or require local agencies to make 
the Program available to applicants who meet the requirements of 
paragraph (c) of this section, but who reside in institutions which meet 
the conditions of paragraphs (n)(1)(i)(A)-(C) of this section with 
respect to resident WIC participants.
    (3) The State or local agency shall attempt to establish to the best 
of its ability,whether a homeless facility or institution complies with 
the conditions of paragraphs (n)(1)(i) (A)-(C) of this section with 
respect to WIC participants. If caseload slots are available, full 
certification periods shall be provided to the following:
    (i) Participants who are residents of a homeless facility or 
institution which has been found to be in compliance with the conditions 
of paragraph (n)(1)(i)(A)-(C) of this section;
    (ii) Participants who are residents of a homeless facility or 
institution whose compliance with the conditions of paragraphs 
(n)(1)(i)(A)-(C) of this section has not yet been established; and
    (iii) Participants for whom no other shelter alternative is 
available in the local agency's service delivery area.
    (4) If a homeless facility or institution has been determined to be 
noncompliant during the course of a participant's initial certification 
period, participants applying for continued benefits may be certified 
again, but the

[[Page 290]]

State agency shall discontinue issuance of WIC foods, except infant 
formula, to the participant in such accommodation until the 
accommodation's compliance is achieved or alternative shelter 
arrangements are made. If certified, such participants shall continue to 
be eligible to receive all other WIC benefits, such as nutrition 
education and health care referral services.
    (5) The State agency shall continue to the end of their 
certification periods the participation of residents of a homeless 
facility or institution which ceases to comply with the conditions of 
paragraphs (n)(1)(i)(A)-(C) of this section.
    (6) As soon as the State or local agency determines that a homeless 
facility/institution does not meet the conditions of paragraphs 
(n)(1)(i) (A)-(C) of this section, it shall refer all participants using 
such accommodation to any other accommodations in the area which meet 
these conditions.
    (o) Drug and other harmful substance abuse screening. When a State 
agency determines that screening is necessary to fulfill the referral 
requirements in this part, the State agency must require screening for 
the use of drugs and other harmful substances. When such screening is 
required, it shall:
    (1) Be limited to the extent the State agency deems necessary to 
fulfill the referral requirement of Sec. 246.4(a)(8) of this part and 
the drug and other harmful substance abuse information requirement of 
Sec. 246.11(a)(3) of this part; and
    (2) Be integrated into certification process as part of the medical 
or nutritional assessment.

[50 FR 6121, Feb. 13, 1985, as amended at 52 FR 21236, June 4, 1987; 53 
FR 35301, Sep. 13, 1988; 54 FR 51295, Dec. 14, 1989; 55 FR 3387, Feb. 1, 
1990; 57 FR 34506, Aug. 5, 1992; 58 FR 11506, Feb. 26, 1993; 59 FR 
11500, Mar. 11, 1994; 60 FR 19490, Apr. 19, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 246.8  Nondiscrimination.

    (a) Civil rights requirements. The State agency shall comply with 
the requirements of title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, title IX 
of the Education Amendments of 1972, section 504 of the Rehabilitation 
Act of 1973, the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, Department of 
Agriculture regulations on nondiscrimination (7 CFR parts 15, 15a and 
15b), and FCS instructions to ensure that no person shall, on the 
grounds of race, color, national origin, age, sex or handicap, be 
excluded from participation in, be denied benefits of, or be otherwise 
subjected to discrimination under the Program. Compliance with title VI 
of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, title IX of the Education Amendments of 
1972, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, the Age 
Discrimination Act of 1975, and regulations and instructions issued 
thereunder shall include, but not be limited to:
    (1) Notification to the public of the nondiscrimination policy and 
complaint rights of participants and potentially eligible persons;
    (2) Review and monitoring activity to ensure Program compliance with 
the nondiscrimination laws and regulations;
    (3) Collection and reporting of racial and ethnic participation data 
as required by title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which prohibits 
discrimination in federally assisted programs on the basis of race, 
color, or national origin; and
    (4) Establishment of grievance procedures for handling complaints 
based on sex and handicap.
    (b) Complaints. Persons seeking to file discrimination complaints 
may file them either with the Secretary of Agriculture, or the Director, 
Office of Equal Opportunity, USDA, Washington, DC 20250 or with the 
Office established by the State agency to handle discrimination 
grievances or complaints. All complaints received by State or local 
agencies which allege discrimination based on race, color, national 
origin, or age shall be referred to the Secretary of Agriculture or 
Director, Office of Equal Opportunity. A State or local agency may 
process complaints which allege discrimination based on sex or handicap 
if grievance procedures are in place.
    (c) Non-English materials. Where a significant number or proportion 
of the population eligible to be served needs service or information in 
a language other than English in order effectively to be informed of or 
to participate in the Program, the State agency shall

[[Page 291]]

take reasonable steps considering the size and concentration of such 
population, to provide information in appropriate languages to such 
persons. This requirement applies with regard to required Program 
information except certification forms which are used only by local 
agency staff. The State agency shall also ensure that all rights and 
responsibilities listed on the certification form are read to these 
applicants in the appropriate language.


<R05>
Sec. 246.9  Fair hearing procedures for participants.

    (a) Availability of hearings. The State agency shall provide a 
hearing procedure through which any individual may appeal a State or 
local agency action which results in a claim against the individual for 
repayment of the cash value of improperly issued benefits or results in 
the individual's denial of participation or disqualification from the 
Program.
    (b) Hearing system. The State agency shall provide for either a 
hearing at the State level or a hearing at the local level which permits 
the individual to appeal a local agency decision to the State agency. 
The State agency may adopt local level hearings in some areas, such as 
those with large caseloads, and maintain only State level hearings in 
other areas.
    (c) Notification of appeal rights. At the time of a claim against an 
individual for improperly issued benefits or at the time of 
participation denial or of disqualification from the Program, the State 
or local agency shall inform each individual in writing of the right to 
a fair hearing, of the method by which a hearing may be requested, and 
that any positions or arguments on behalf of the individual may be 
presented personally or by a representative such as a relative, friend, 
legal counsel or other spokesperson. Such notification is not required 
at the expiration of a certification period.
    (d) Request for hearing. A request for a hearing is defined as any 
clear expression by the individual, the individual's parent, caretaker, 
or other representative, that he or she desires an opportunity to 
present his or her case to a higher authority. The State or local agency 
shall not limit or interfere with the individual's freedom to request a 
hearing.
    (e) Time limit for request. The State or local agency shall provide 
individuals a reasonable period of time to request fair hearings; 
provided that, such time limit is not less than 60 days from the date 
the agency mails or gives the applicant or participant the notice of 
adverse action.
    (f) Denial or dismissal of request. The State and local agencies 
shall not deny or dismiss a request for a hearing unless--
    (1) The request is not received within the time limit set by the 
State agency in accordance with paragraph (e) of this section;
    (2) The request is withdrawn in writing by the appellant or a 
representative of the appellant;
    (3) The appellant or representative fails, without good cause, to 
appear at the scheduled hearing; or
    (4) The appellant has been denied participation by a previous 
hearing and cannot provide evidence that circumstances relevant to 
Program eligibility have changed in such a way as to justify a hearing.
    (g) Continuation of benefits. Except for participants whose 
certification period has expired, participants who appeal the 
termination of benefits within the 15 days advance adverse notice period 
provided by Sec. 246.7(j)(6) shall continue to receive Program benefits 
until the hearing official reaches a decision or the certification 
period expires, whichever occurs first. Applicants who are denied 
benefits at initial certification or because of the expiration of their 
certification may appeal the denial, but shall not receive benefits 
while awaiting the hearing.
    (h) Rules of procedure. State and local agencies shall process each 
request for a hearing under uniform rules of procedure and shall makes 
these rules of procedure available for public inspection and copying. At 
a minimum, such rules shall include: The time limits for requesting and 
conducting a hearing; all advance notice requirements; the rules of 
conduct at the hearing; and the rights and responsibilities of the 
appellant. The procedures shall not be unduly complex or legalistic.

[[Page 292]]

    (i) Hearing official. Hearings shall be conducted by an impartial 
official who does not have any personal stake or involvement in the 
decision and who was not directly involved in the initial determination 
of the action being contested. The hearing official shall--
    (1) Administer oaths or affirmations if required by the State;
    (2) Ensure that all relevant issues are considered;
    (3) Request, receive and make part of the hearing record all 
evidence determined necessary to decide the issues being raised;
    (4) Regulate the conduct and course of the hearing consistent with 
due process to ensure an orderly hearing;
    (5) Order, where relevant and necessary, an independent medical 
assessment or professional evaluation from a source mutually 
satisfactory to the appellant and the State agency; and
    (6) Render a hearing decision which will resolve the dispute.
    (j) Conduct of the hearing. The State or lcoal agency shall ensure 
that the hearing is accessible to the appellant and is held within three 
weeks from the date the State or local agency received the request for a 
hearing. The State or local agency shall provide the appellant with a 
minimum of 10 days advance written notice of the time and place of the 
hearing and shall enclose an explanation of the hearing procedure with 
the notice. The State or local agency shall also provide the appellant 
or representative an opportunity to--
    (1) Examine, prior to and during the hearing, the documents and 
records presented to support the decision under appeal;
    (2) Be assisted or represented by an attorney or other persons;
    (3) Bring witnesses;
    (4) Advance arguments without undue interference;
    (5) Question or refute any testimony or evidence, including an 
opportunity to confront and cross-examine adverse witnesses; and
    (6) Submit evidence to establish all pertinent facts and 
circumstances in the case.
    (k) Fair hearing decisions. (1) Decisions of the hearing official 
shall be based upon the application of appropriate Federal law, 
regulations and policy as related to the facts of the case as 
established in the hearing record. The verbatim transcript or recording 
of testimony and exhibits, or an official report containing the 
substance of what transpired at the hearing, together with all papers 
and requests filed in the proceeding, constitute the exclusive record 
for a final decision by hearing official. The State or local agency 
shall retain the hearing record in accordance with Sec. 246.25 and make 
these records available, for copying and inspection, to the appellant or 
representative at any reasonable time.
    (2) The decision by the hearing official shall summarize the facts 
of the case, specify the reasons for the decision, and identify the 
supporting evidence and the pertinent regulations or policy. The 
decision shall become a part of the record.
    (3) Within 45 days of the receipt of the request for the hearing, 
the State or local agency shall notify the appellant or representative 
in writing of the decision and the reasons for the decision in 
accordance with paragraph (k)(2) of this section. If the decision is in 
favor of the appellant and benefits were denied or discontinued, 
benefits shall begin immediately. If the decision concerns 
disqualification and is in favor of the agency, as soon as 
administratively feasible, the local agency shall terminate any 
continued benefits, as decided by the hearing official. If the decision 
regarding repayment of benefits by the appellant is in favor of the 
agency, the State or local agency shall resume its efforts to collect 
the claim, even during pendency of an appeal of a local-level fair 
hearing decision to the State agency. The appellant may appeal a local 
hearing decision to the State agency, provided that the request for 
appeal is made within 15 days of the mailing date of the hearing 
decision notice. If the decision being appealed concerns 
disqualification from the Program, the appellant shall not continue to 
receive benefits while an appeal to the State agency of a decision 
rendered on appeal at the local level is pending. The decision of a 
hearing official at the local level is binding on the local agency and 
the State agency unless it is appealed to the State

[[Page 293]]

level and overturned by the State hearing official.
    (4) The State and local agency shall make all hearing records and 
decisions available for public inspection and copying; however, the 
names and addresses of participants and other members of the public 
shall be kept confidential.
    (l) Judicial review. If a State level decision upholds the agency 
action and the appellant expresses an interest in pursuing a higher 
review of the decision, the State agency shall explain any further State 
level review of the decision and any State level rehearing process. If 
these are either unavailable or have been exhausted, the State agency 
shall explain the right to pursue judicial review of the decision.

[50 FR 6121, Feb. 13, 1985, as amended at 52 FR 21236, June 4, 1987; 59 
FR 11503, Mar. 11, 1994]


<R04>
                     Subpart D--Participant Benefits


<R05>
Sec. 246.10  Supplemental foods.

    (a) General. This section prescribes the requirements for providing 
supplemental foods to participants.
    (b) State agency responsibilities. State agencies shall--
    (1) Identify foods which are acceptable for use under the Program in 
accordance with the requirements of this section and provide to local 
agencies a list of acceptable foods and their maximum monthly quantities 
as specified in paragraph (c) of this section; and
    (2) Ensure that local agencies--
    (i) Make available at least one food from each group in each food 
package listed in paragraph (c) of this section. However, this does not 
mean that the local agency must provide each participant with a food 
from each food group;
    (ii) Make available to participants the supplemental foods, as 
authorized in paragraph (c) of this section; and
    (iii) Designate a competent professional authority to prescribe 
types of supplemental foods in quantities appropriate for each 
participant, taking into consideration the participant's age and dietary 
needs. The amounts of supplemental foods shall not exceed the maximum 
quantities specified in this section.
    (c) Food packages. There are seven food packages available under the 
Program which may be provided to participants. The authorized 
supplemental foods shall be prescribed from food packages according to 
the category and nutritional need of the participant. The food packages 
are as follows:

    Note: The metric units given are mathematical conversions. If 
packaging practices change, the authorized food quantities will be 
revised accordingly.

    (1) Food Package I--Infants 0 Through 3 Months. (i) Iron-fortified 
infant formula, which is a complete formula not requiring the addition 
of any ingredients other than water prior to being served in a liquid 
state, and which contains at least 10 milligrams of iron per liter of 
formula at standard dilution which supplies 67 kilocalories per 
milliliters; i.e., approximately 20 kilocalories per fluid ounce of 
formula at standard dilution. Formulas which do not meet these 
requirements are authorized when a physician determines that the infant 
has a medical condition which contraindicates the use of infant formula 
as described above including, but not limited to, medical conditions 
which contraindicate the use of iron-fortified formula, metabolic 
disorders, inborn errors of amino acid metabolism, gastrointestinal 
disorders, malabsorption syndromes, and allergies. Low-calorie formulas 
are not authorized solely for the purpose of managing body weight of 
infants. Documentation of the physician's determination of the need for 
a formula which does not meet the requirements described above the 
specific formula prescribed shall be included in the participant's 
certification file. Concentrated liquid or powdered formula shall be 
provided, except that, ready-to-feed formula may be authorized when the 
competent professional authority determines and documents that there is 
an unsanitary or restricted water supply, that there is poor 
refrigeration or that the person who is caring for an infant may have 
difficulty in correctly diluting concentrated liquid or powdered 
formula.
    (ii) The quantities and types of supplemental foods prescribed shall 
be appropriate for the participant taking into consideration the 
participant's

[[Page 294]]

age and dietary needs. The maximum quantity of supplemental foods 
authorized per month is as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 Food                               Quantity            
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Formula:                                                                
  Concentrated liquid formula.........  403 fluid oz. (11.9 L).         
        or                                                              
  Powdered formula....................  May be substituted at the rate  
                                         of 8 lbs. (3.6 kg) per 403     
                                         fluid oz. (11.9 L) of          
                                         concentrated liquid formula.   
        or                                                              
  Ready-to-feed formula...............  May be substituted at the rate  
                                         of 26 fluid oz. (.8 L) per 13  
                                         fluid oz. (.4 L) of            
                                         concentrated liquid formula.   
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (2) Food Package II--Infants 4 through 12 Months. (i) Formula as 
specified in paragraph (c)(1)(i) of this section.
    (ii) Infant cereal which contains a minimum of 45 milligrams of iron 
per 100 grams of dry cereal.
    (iii) Single strength fruit juice which contains a minimum of 30 
milligrams of vitamin C per 100 milliliters; or frozen concentrated 
fruit juice which contains a minimum of 30 milligrams of vitamin C per 
100 milliliters of reconstituted juice; or infant juice which contains a 
minimum of 30 milligrams of vitamin C per 100 milliliters. Issuance 
prior to the time when the infant can drink from a cup is discouraged. 
The competent professional authority shall instruct the participant's 
parent or guardian to feed the juice to the participant from a cup to 
prevent ``bottle caries.''
    (iv) The quantities and types of supplemental foods prescribed shall 
be appropriate for the participant taking into consideration the 
participant's age and dietary needs. The maximum quantity of 
supplemental foods authorized per month is as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 Food                               Quantity            
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Formula:                                                                
  Concentrated liquid formula.........  403 fluid oz. (11.9 L).         
        or                                                              
  Powdered formula....................  May be substituted at the rate  
                                         of 8 lb. (3.6 kg) per 403 fluid
                                         oz. (11.9 L) of concentrated   
                                         liquid formula.                
        or                                                              
  Ready-to-feed formula...............  May be substituted at the rate  
                                         of 26 fluid oz. (.8 L) per 13  
                                         fluid oz. (.4 L) of            
                                         concentrated liquid formula.   
Infant cereal.........................  24 oz. dry (.7 kg).             
Juice: \1\                                                              
  Single strength adult juice.........  92 fluid oz. (2.7 L).           
        or                                                              
  Frozen concentrated juice...........  96 fluid oz. reconstituted (2.8 
                                         L).                            
        or                                                              
  Infant juice........................  May be substituted at the rate  
                                         of 63 fluid oz. (1.9 L) of     
                                         infant juice per 92 fluid oz.  
                                         (2.7 L) of single strength     
                                         adult juice.                   
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Combinations of single strength or frozen concentrated juice may be 
  issued as long as the total volume of juice does not exceed the amount
  specified for single strength juice.                                  

    (3) Food Package III--Children/Women with Special Dietary Needs. 
Children and women with special dietary needs may receive the following 
supplemental foods if the physician determines that the participant has 
a medical condition which precludes or restricts the use of conventional 
foods and necessitates the use of a formula including, but not limited 
to, metabolic disorders, inborn errors of amino acid metabolism, 
gastrointestinal disorders, malabsorption syndrome and allergies. The 
supplemental foods described below are not authorized solely for the 
purpose of enhancing nutrient intake or managing body weight of children 
and women participants. Documentation of the physician's determination 
of the need for a formula and the specific formula prescribed shall be 
included in the participant's certification file.
    (i) Formula intended for use as an oral feeding and prescribed by a 
physician.
    (ii) Cereal (hot or cold) which contains a minimum of 28 milligrams 
of iron per 100 grams of dry cereal and not more than 21.2 grams of 
sucrose and other sugars per 100 grams of dry cereal (6 grams per 
ounce).
    (iii) Single strength fruit juice or vegetable juice, or both, which 
contains a minimum of 30 milligrams of vitamin C per 100 milliliters; or 
frozen concentrated fruit or vegetable juice, or both, which contains a 
minimum of 30 milligrams of vitiamin C per 100 milliliters of 
reconstituted juice.
    (iv) The quantities and types of supplemental foods prescribed shall 
be appropriate for the participant taking into consideration the 
participant's age and special dietary needs. The maximum quantity of 
supplemental foods authorized per month is as follows:

[[Page 295]]



------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 Food                               Quantity            
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Formula:                                                                
  Concentrated liquid formula.........  403 fluid oz. (11.9 L).         
  Addition \1\........................  52 fluid oz. (1.5 L).           
        or                                                              
  Powdered formula....................  May be substituted at a rate of 
                                         8 lb. (3.6 kg) per 403 fluid   
                                         oz. (11.9 L) of concentrated   
                                         liquid formula.                
  Addition \1\........................  1 lb. (.4 kg).                  
        or                                                              
  Ready-to-feed formula...............  May be substituted at the rate  
                                         of 26 fluid oz. (.8 L) per 13  
                                         fluid oz. (.4 L) of            
                                         concentrated liquid formula.   
  Addition \1\........................  104 fluid oz. (3.1 L).          
Cereal (hot or cold)..................  36 oz. dry (1 kg).              
Juice: \2\                                                              
  Single strength juice...............  138 fluid oz. (4.1 L).          
        or                                                              
  Frozen concentrated juice...........  144 fluid oz. reconstituted (4.3
                                         L).                            
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Additional formula may be issued on an individual basis provided the
  need is demonstrated and documented in the individual's certification 
  file by the competent professional authority.                         
\2\ Combinations of single strength and frozen concentrated juice may be
  issued as long as the total volume does not exceed the amount         
  specified for single strength juice.                                  

    (4) Food Package IV--Children 1 to 5 Years. (i) Pasteurized fluid 
whole milk which is flavored or unflavored and which contains 400 
International Units of vitamin D per quart (.9 liter); or pasteurized 
fluid skim or lowfat milk which is flavored or unflavored and which 
contains 400 International Units of vitamin D and 2000 International 
Units of vitamin A per fluid quart (.9 liter); or pasteurized cultured 
buttermilk which contains 400 International units of vitamin D and 2000 
International Units of vitamin A per fluid quart (.9 liter); or 
evaporated whole milk which contains 400 International Units of vitamin 
D per reconstituted quart (.9 liter); or evaporated skimmed milk which 
contains 400 International Units of vitamin D and 2000 International 
Units of vitamin A per reconstituted quart (.9 liter); or dry whole milk 
which contains 400 International Units of vitamin D per reconstituted 
quart (.9 liter); or nonfat or lowfat dry milk which contains 400 
International Units of vitamin D and 2000 International Units of vitamin 
A per reconstituted quart (.9 liter); or domestic cheese (pasteurized 
process American, Monterey Jack, Colby, natural Cheddar, Swiss, Brick, 
Muenster, Provolone, Mozzarella Part-Skim or Whole).
    (ii) Cereal (hot or cold) which contains a minimum of 28 milligrams 
of iron per 100 grams of dry cereal and not more than 21.2 grams of 
sucrose and other sugars per 100 grams of dry cereal (6 grams per 
ounce).
    (iii) Single strength fruit juice or vegetable juice, or both, which 
contains a minimum of 30 milligrams of vitamin C per 100 milliliters; or 
frozen concentrated fruit or vegetable juice, or both, which contains a 
minimum of 30 milligrams of vitamin C per 100 milliliters of 
reconstituted juice.
    (iv) Eggs or dried egg mix.
    (v) Peanut butter or mature dry beans or peas, including but not 
limited to, lentils, black, navy, kidney, garbanzo, soy, pinto, and mung 
beans, crowder, cow, split and black-eyed peas.
    (vi) The quantities and types of supplemental foods prescribed shall 
be appropriate for the participant taking into consideration the 
participant's age and dietary needs. The maximum quantity of 
supplemental foods authorized per month is as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 Food                               Quantity            
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Milk:                                                                   
  Fluid whole milk....................  24 qt. (22.7 L).                
        or                                                              
  Fluid skim or low fat milk..........  May be substituted for fluid    
                                         whole milk on a quart-for-quart
                                         (.9 L) basis.                  
        or                                                              
  Cultured buttermilk.................  May be substituted for fluid    
                                         whole milk on a quart-for-quart
                                         (.9 L) basis.                  
        or                                                              
  Evaporated whole milk...............  May be substituted for fluid    
                                         whole milk at the rate of 13   
                                         fluid oz. (.4 L) per qt. (.9 L)
                                         of fluid whole milk.           
        or                                                              
  Evaporated skimmed milk.............  May be substituted for fluid    
                                         whole milk at the rate of 13   
                                         fluid oz. (.4 L) per qt. (.9 L)
                                         of fluid whole milk.           
        or                                                              
  Dry whole milk......................  May be substituted for fluid    
                                         whole milk at the rate of 1 lb.
                                         (.4 kg) per 3 qt. (2.8 L) of   
                                         fluid whole milk.              
        or                                                              
  Nonfat or lowfat dry milk...........  May be substituted for fluid    
                                         whole milk at the rate of 1 lb.
                                         (.4 kg) per 5 qt. (4.7 L) of   
                                         fluid whole milk.              
        or                                                              
  Cheese..............................  May be substituted for fluid    
                                         whole milk at the rate of 1 lb.
                                         (.4 kg) per 3 qt. (2.8 L) of   
                                         fluid whole milk. 4 lbs. (1.8  
                                         kg) is the maximum amount which
                                         may be substituted. <SUP>1          
Eggs:                                                                   
  Eggs................................  2 doz. or 2\1/2\ doz.           
        or                                                              
  Dried egg mix.......................  May be substituted at the rate  
                                         of 1.5 lb. (.7 kg) egg mix per 
                                         2 doz. fresh eggs or 2 lb. (.9 
                                         kg) egg mix per 2\1/2\ doz.    
                                         fresh eggs.                    
Cereals (hot or cold).................  36 oz. dry (1 kg).              
                                                                        

[[Page 296]]

                                                                        
Juice:<SUP>2                                                                 
                                                                        
  Single strength juice...............  276 fluid oz. (8.2 L).          
        or                                                              
  Frozen concentrated juice...........  288 fluid oz. reconstituted (8.5
                                         L).                            
Legumes:                                                                
  Dry beans or peas...................  1 lb. (.4 kg).                  
        or                                                              
  Peanut butter.......................  18 oz. (.5 kg).                 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Additional cheese may be issued on an individual basis in cases of  
  lactose intolerance, provided the need is documented in the           
  participant's file by the competent professional authority.           
\2\ Combinations of single strength and frozen concentrated juice may be
  issued as long as the total volume does not exceed the amount         
  specified for single strength juice.                                  

    (5) Food Package V--Pregnant and Breastfeeding Women (Basic). (i) 
Pasteurized fluid whole milk which is flavored or unflavored and which 
contains 400 International Units of Vitamin D per quart (.9 liter) or 
pasteurized fluid skim or lowfat milk which is flavored or unflavored 
and which contains 400 International Units of vitamin D and 2000 
International Units of vitamin A per fluid quart (.9 liter); or 
pasteurized cultured buttermilk which contains 400 International Units 
of vitamin D and 2000 International Units of vitamin A per fluid quart 
(.9 liter); or evaporated whole milk which contains 400 International 
Units of vitamin D per reconstituted quart (.9 liter); or evaporated 
skimmed milk which contains 400 International Units of vitamin D and 
2000 International Units of vitamin A per reconstituted quart (.9 
liter); or dry whole milk which contains 400 International Units of 
vitamin D per reconstituted quart (.9 liter); or nonfat or lowfat dry 
milk which contains 400 International Units of vitamin D and 2000 
International Units of vitamin A per reconstituted quart (.9 liter); or 
domestic cheese (pasteurized process American, Monterey Jack, Colby, 
natural Cheddar, Swiss, Brick, Muenster, Provolone, Mozzarella Part-Skim 
or Whole).
    (ii) Adult cereal (hot or cold) which contains a minimum of 28 
milligrams of iron per 100 grams of dry cereal and not more than 21.2 
grams of sucrose and other sugars per 100 grams of dry cereal (6 grams 
per ounce).
    (iii) Single strength fruit juice or vegetable juice, or both, which 
contains a minimum of 30 milligrams of vitamin C per 100 milliliters; or 
frozen concentrated fruit or vegetable juice, or both, which contains a 
minimum of 30 milligrams of vitamin C per 100 milliliters of 
reconstituted juice.
    (iv) Eggs or dried egg mix.
    (v) Peanut butter or mature dry beans or peas, including but not 
limited to lentils, black, navy, kidney, garbanzo, soy, pinto and mung 
beans, crowder, cow, split and black-eyed peas.
    (vi) The quantities and types of supplemental foods prescribed shall 
be appropriate for the participant taking into consideration the 
participant's age and dietary needs. The maximum quantity of 
supplemental foods authorized per month is as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 Food                               Quantity            
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Milk:                                                                   
  Fluid whole milk....................  28 qt. (26.5 L).                
        or                                                              
  Fluid skim or lowfat milk...........  May be substituted for fluid    
                                         whole milk on a quart-for-quart
                                         (.9 L) basis.                  
        or                                                              
  Cultured buttermilk.................  May be substituted for fluid    
                                         whole milk on a quart-for-quart
                                         (.9 L) basis.                  
        or                                                              
  Evaporated whole milk...............  May be substituted for fluid    
                                         whole milk at the rate of 13   
                                         fluid oz. (.4 L) per qt. (.9 L)
                                         of fluid whole milk.           
        or                                                              
  Evaporated skimmed milk.............  May be substituted for fluid    
                                         whole milk at the rate of 13   
                                         fluid oz. (.4 L) per qt. (.9 L)
                                         of fluid whole milk.           
        or                                                              
  Dry whole milk......................  May be substituted for fluid    
                                         whole milk at the rate of 1 lb.
                                         (.4 kg) per 3 qt. (2.8 L) of   
                                         fluid whole milk.              
        or                                                              
  Nonfat or lowfat dry milk...........  May be substituted for fluid    
                                         whole milk at the rate of 1 lb.
                                         (.4 kg) per 5 qt. (4.7 L) of   
                                         fluid whole milk.              
        or                                                              
  Cheese..............................  May be substituted for fluid    
                                         whole milk at the rate of 1 lb.
                                         (.4 kg) per 3 qt. (2.8 L) of   
                                         fluid whole milk. 4 lbs. (1.8  
                                         kg) is the maximum amount which
                                         may be substituted.<SUP>1           
Eggs:                                                                   
  Eggs................................  2 doz. or 2\1/2\ doz.           
        or                                                              
  Dried egg mix.......................  May be substituted at the rate  
                                         of 1.5 lb. (.7 kg) egg mix per 
                                         2 doz. fresh eggs, or 2 lb. (.9
                                         kg) egg mix per 2\1/2\ doz.    
                                         fresh eggs.                    
Cereals (hot or cold).................  36 oz. dry (1 kg).              
Juice:<SUP>2                                                                 
  Single strength juice...............  276 fluid oz. (8.2 L).          
        or                                                              
  Frozen, concentrated juice..........  288 fluid oz. reconstituted (8.5
                                         L).                            
Legumes:                                                                
  Dry beans or peas...................  1 lb. (.4 kg).                  

[[Page 297]]

                                                                        
        or                                                              
  Peanut butter.......................  18 oz. (.5 kg).                 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
<SUP>1 Additional cheese may be issued on an individual basis in cases of    
  lactose intolerance, provided the need is documented in the           
  participant's file by the competent professional authority.           
<SUP>2 Combinations of single strength or frozen concentrated juice may be   
  issued as long as the total volume does not exceed the amount         
  specified for single strength juice.                                  

    (6) Food Package VI--Non-breastfeeding Postpartum Women. (i) 
Pasteurized fluid whole milk which is flavored or unflavored and which 
contains 400 International Units of vitamin D per quart (.9 liter); or 
pasteurized fluid skim or lowfat milk which is flavored or unflavored 
and which contains 400 International Units of vitamin D and 2000 
International Units of vitamin A per fluid quart (.9 liter); or 
pasteurized cultured buttermilk which contains 400 International Units 
of vitamin D and 2000 International Units of vitamin A per fluid quart 
(.9 liter); or evaporated whole milk which contains 400 International 
Units of vitamin D per reconstituted quart (.9 liter); or evaporated 
skimmed milk which contains 400 International Units of vitamin D and 
2000 International Units of vitamin A per reconstituted quart (.9 
liter); or dry whole milk which contains 400 International Units of 
vitamin D per reconstituted quart (.9 liter); or nonfat or lowfat dry 
milk which contains 400 International Units of Vitamin D and 2000 
International Units of vitamin A per reconstituted quart (.9 liter); or 
domestic cheese (pasteurized process American, Monterey Jack, Colby, 
natural Cheddar, Swiss, Brick, Muenster, Provolone, Mozzarella Part-Skim 
or Whole).
    (ii) Cereal (hot or cold) which contains a minimum of 28 milligrams 
of iron per 100 grams of dry cereal and not more than 21.1 grams of 
sucrose and other sugars per 100 grams of dry cereal (6 grams per 1 
ounce).
    (iii) Single strength fruit juice or vegetable juice, or both, which 
contains a minimum of 30 milligrams of vitamin C per 100 milliliters; or 
concentrated fruit or vegetable juice, or both, which contains a minimum 
of 30 milligrams of vitamin C per 100 milliliters of reconstituted 
juice.
    (iv) Eggs or dried egg mix.
    (v) The quantities and types of supplemental foods prescribed shall 
be appropriate for the participant taking into consideration the 
participant's age and dietary needs. The maximum quantity of 
supplemental foods authorized per month is as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 Food                               Quantity            
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Milk:                                                                   
  Fluid whole milk....................  24 qt. (22.7 L).                
        or                                                              
  Fluid skim or lowfat milk...........  May be substituted for fluid    
                                         whole milk on a quart-for-quart
                                         (.9 L ) basis.                 
        or                                                              
  Cultured buttermilk.................  May be substituted for fluid    
                                         whole milk on a quart-for-quart
                                         (.9 L) basis.                  
        or                                                              
  Evaporated whole milk...............  May be substituted for fluid    
                                         whole milk at the rate of 13   
                                         fluid oz. (.4 L) per qt. (.9 L)
                                         of fluid whole milk.           
        or                                                              
  Evaporated skimmed milk.............  May be substituted for fluid    
                                         whole milk at the rate of 13   
                                         fluid oz. (.4 L) per qt. (.9 L)
                                         of fluid whole milk.           
        or                                                              
  Dry whole milk......................  May be substituted for fluid    
                                         whole milk at the rate of 1 lb.
                                         (.4 kg) per 3 qt. (2.8 L) of   
                                         fluid whole milk.              
        or                                                              
  Nonfat or lowfat dry milk...........  May be substituted for fluid    
                                         whole milk at the rate of 1 lb.
                                         (.4 kg) per 5 qt. (4.7 L) of   
                                         fluid whole milk.              
        or                                                              
  Cheese..............................  May be substituted for fluid    
                                         whole milk at the rate of 1 lb.
                                         (.4 kg) per 3 qt. (2.8 L) of   
                                         fluid whole milk. 4 lbs. (1.8  
                                         kg) is the maximum amount which
                                         may be substituted.<SUP>1           
Eggs:                                                                   
  Eggs................................  2 doz. or 2\1/2\ doz.           
        or                                                              
  Dried egg mix.......................  May be substituted at the rate  
                                         of 1.5 lb. (.7 kg) egg mix per 
                                         2 doz. fresh eggs of 2 lb. (.9 
                                         kg) egg mix per 2\1/2\ doz.    
                                         fresh eggs.                    
Cereal (hot or cold)..................  36 oz. dry (1 kg).              
Juice.<SUP>2                                                                 
  Single strength juice...............  184 fluid oz. (5.4 L).          
        or                                                              
  Frozen concentrated juice...........  192 fluid oz. reconstituted (5.7
                                         L).                            
------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Additional cheese may be issued on an individual basis in cases of  
  lactose intolerance, provided the need is documented in the           
  participant's file by the competent professional authority.           
\2\ Combinations of single strength or frozen concentrated juice may be 
  issued as long as the total volume does not exceed the amount         
  specified for single strength juice.                                  

    (7) Food Package VII--Breastfeeding Women (Enhanced). (i) 
Pasteurized fluid whole milk which is flavored or unflavored and which 
contains 400 International Units of Vitamin D per quart (.9 liter) or 
pasteurized fluid skim or lowfat milk which is flavored or unflavored 
and which contains 400 International Units of vitamin D and

[[Page 298]]

2000 International Units of vitamin A per fluid quart (.9 liter); or 
pasteurized cultured buttermilk which contains 400 International Units 
of vitamin D and 2000 International Units of vitamin A per fluid quart 
(.9 liter); or evaporated whole milk which contains 400 International 
Units of vitamin D per reconstituted quart (.9 liter); or evaporated 
skim milk which contains 400 International Units of vitamin D and 2000 
International Units of vitamin A per reconstituted quart (.9 liter); or 
dry whole milk which contains 400 International Units of vitamin D per 
reconstituted quart (.9 liter); or nonfat or lowfat dry milk which 
contains 400 International Units of vitamin D and 2000 International 
Units of vitamin A per reconstituted quart (.9 liter); or domestic 
cheese (pasteurized process American, Monterey Jack, Colby, natural 
Cheddar, Swiss, Brick, Muenster, Provolone, Mozzarella Part-Skim or 
Whole).
    (ii) Domestic cheese (pasteurized process American, Monterey Jack, 
Colby, natural Cheddar, Swiss, Brick, Muenster, Provolone, Mozzarella 
Part-Skim or Whole).
    (iii) Adult cereal (hot or cold) which contains a minimum of 28 
milligrams of iron per 100 grams of dry cereal and not more than 21.2 
grams of sucrose and other sugars per 100 grams of dry cereal (6 grams 
per ounce).
    (iv) Single strength fruit juice or vegetable juice, or both, which 
contains a minimum of 30 milligrams of vitamin C per 100 milliliters; or 
frozen concentrated fruit or vegetable juice, or both, which contains a 
minimum of 30 milligrams of vitamin C per 100 milliliters of 
reconstituted juice.
    (v) Eggs or dried egg mix.
    (vi) Peanut butter.
    (vii) Mature dry beans or peas, including but not limited to 
lentils, black, navy, kidney, garbanzo, soy, pinto and mung beans, 
crowder, cow, split and black-eyed peas.
    (viii) Tuna: Canned white, light, dark or blended tuna packed in 
water or oil, including solid and solid pack; chunk, chunks and chunk 
style; flake and flakes; and grated.
    (ix) Carrots: Raw, canned or frozen. Mature raw; canned and frozen 
carrots containing only the mature root of the carrot plant packed in 
water.
    (x) The quantities and types of supplemental foods prescribed shall 
be appropriate for the participant taking into consideration the 
participant's age and dietary needs. The maximum quantity of 
supplemental foods authorized per month is as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
             Food                               Quantity                
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Milk:                                                                   
    Fluid whole milk or......  28 qt. (26.5 L).                         
    Cheese or................  May be substituted for fluid whole milk  
                                at the rate of 1 lb. (.4 kg) per 3 qt.  
                                (2.8 L) of fluid whole milk. 4 lbs. (1.8
                                kg) is the maximum amount which may be  
                                substituted.                            
                               Additional cheese may be issued on an    
                                individual basis in cases of lactose    
                                intolerance, provided the need is       
                                documented in the participant's file by 
                                the competent professional authority.   
    Fluid skim or lowfat milk  May be substituted for fluid whole milk  
     or.                        on a quart-for-quart (.9 L) basis.      
    Cultured buttermilk or...  May be substituted for fluid whole milk  
                                on a quart-for-quart (.9 L) basis.      
    Evaporated whole milk or.  May be substituted for fluid whole milk  
                                at the rate of 13 fluid oz. (.4 L) per  
                                qt. (.9 L) of fluid whole milk.         
    Evaporated skimmed milk    May be substituted for fluid whole milk  
     or.                        at the rate of 13 fluid oz. (.4 L) per  
                                qt. (.9 L) of fluid whole milk.         
    Dry whole milk or........  May be substituted for fluid whole milk  
                                at the rate of 1 lb. (.4 kg) per 3 qt.  
                                (2.8 L) of fluid whole milk.            
    Nonfat or lowfat dry milk  May be substituted for fluid whole milk  
                                at the rate of 1 lb. (.4 kg) per 5 qt.  
                                (4.7 L) of fluid whole milk.            
Cheese:                                                                 
    Cheese...................  1 lb. (.4 kg).                           
Eggs:                                                                   
    Eggs or..................  2 doz. or 2\1/2\ doz.                    
    Dried egg mix............  May be substituted at the rate of 1.5 lb.
                                (.7 kg) egg mix per 2 doz. fresh eggs,  
                                or 2 lb. (.9 kg) egg mix per 2\1/2\ doz.
                                fresh eggs.                             
Cereals:                                                                
    Cereals (hot or cold)....  36 oz. dry (1 kg).                       
Juice:                                                                  
    Single strength juice or.  322 fluid oz. (9.6 L).                   

[[Page 299]]

                                                                        
    Frozen concentrated juice  336 fluid oz. reconstituted (10.0 L).    
                               Combinations of single strength or frozen
                                concentrated juice may be issued as long
                                as the total volume does not exceed the 
                                amount specified for single strength    
                                juice.                                  
Legumes:                                                                
    Dry beans or peas and....  1 lb. (.4 kg). May be substituted for    
                                peanut butter at the rate of 1 lb. of   
                                dry beans or peas per 18 oz. of peanut  
                                butter.                                 
    Peanut butter............  18 oz. (.5 kg). Peanut butter may not be 
                                substituted for mature dry beans or peas
                                at any rate.                            
Fish:                                                                   
    Tuna.....................  26 oz. (.8 kg).                          
Vegetable:                                                              
    Raw carrots or...........  2 lb. (.9 kg).                           
    Frozen carrots or........  May be substituted for fresh at the rate 
                                of 1 lb. frozen per 1 lb. fresh.        
    Canned carrots...........  May be substituted for fresh at the rate 
                                of 1 16-20 ounce can of carrots per 1   
                                lb. fresh.                              
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (d) Use of commodity foods. (1) At the request of a State agency, 
the Department will purchase commodity foods for the State agency using 
funds allocated to the State agency. The commodity foods purchased and 
made available to the State agency shall be equivalent to the foods 
specified in paragraph (c) of this section.
    (2) The State agency shall--
    (i) Distribute the commodity foods to the local agency or 
participant;
    (ii) Ensure satisfactory storage conditions for the commodity foods, 
including documentation of proper insurance; and
    (iii) Ensure that there are proper storage facilities for commodity 
foods.
    (e) Plans for substitutions or eliminations. (1) The State agency 
may submit to FCS a plan for substitution of food(s) acceptable for use 
in the Program to allow for different cultural eating patterns and 
substitution or elimination of a category of foods to accommodate the 
special needs of homeless persons, and/or residents of institutions if 
the State agency chooses to serve such persons under Sec. 246.7(m)(2) of 
this part. The plan shall provide the State agency's justification, 
including a specific explanation of the cultural eating pattern or the 
homeless situation which requires the proposed alteration and other 
information necessary for FCS to evaluate the plan as specified in 
paragraph (e)(2) of this section for cultural substitutions and in 
paragraph (e)(3) of this section for homeless substitutions or 
eliminations.
    (2) FCS will evaluate a State agency's plan for substitution of 
foods for different cultural eating patterns based on the following 
criteria:
    (i) Any proposed substitute food must be nutritionally equivalent or 
superior to the food it is intended to replace.
    (ii) The proposed substitute must be widely available to 
participants in the areas where the substitute is intended to be used.
    (iii) The cost of the substitute must be equivalent to or less than 
the cost of the food it is intended to replace.
    (3) FCS will evaluate a State agency's plan for substitution or 
elimination of a food category to accommodate the special needs of a 
specific group of homeless persons based on the justification presented 
by the State agency documenting the need. Documentation shall illustrate 
that all alternatives from within existing food packages have been 
explored and shall include a specific description of the circumstances 
of the homeless persons to be served that necessitate the proposed food 
package alteration.
    (4) FCS will make a determination on the proposed plan based on the 
evaluation criteria specified in paragraph (e)(2) or (e)(3) of this 
section, as appropriate. The State agency shall substitute or eliminate 
foods only after receiving the written approval of FCS.
    (f) Infant formula manufacturer registration. Infant formula 
manufacturers supplying formula to the WIC Program shall register with 
the Secretary of Health and Human Services under the Federal Food, Drug, 
and Cosmetic Act

[[Page 300]]

(21 U.S.C. 321 et seq.). Such manufacturers wishing to bid for a State 
contract to supply infant formula to the program shall first certify 
with the State health department that their formulas comply with the 
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act and regulations issued pursuant to 
the Act.

[50 FR 6121, Feb. 13, 1985; 50 FR 8098, Feb. 28, 1985, as amended at 51 
FR 13208, Apr. 18, 1986; 51 FR 16155, May 1, 1986; 53 FR 25314, July 6, 
1988; 54 FR 51295, Dec. 14, 1989; 57 FR 34506, Aug. 5, 1992; 57 FR 
56240, Nov. 27, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 246.11  Nutrition education.

    (a) General. (1) Nutrition education shall be considered a benefit 
of the Program, and shall be made available at no cost to the 
participant. Nutrition education shall be designed to be easily 
understood by participants, and it shall bear a practical relationship 
to participant nutritional needs, household situations, and cultural 
preferences including information on how to select food for themselves 
and their families. Nutrition education shall be thoroughly integrated 
into participant health care plans, the delivery of supplemental foods, 
and other Program operations.
    (2) The State agency shall ensure that nutrition education is made 
available to all participants. Nutrition education may be provided 
through the local agencies directly, or through arrangements made with 
other agencies. At the time of certification, the local agency shall 
stress the positive, long-term benefits of nutrition education and 
encourage the participant to attend and participate in nutrition 
education activities. However, individual participants shall not be 
denied supplemental foods for failure to attend or participate in 
nutrition education activities.
    (3) As an integral part of nutrition education, the State agency 
shall ensure that local agencies provide drug and other harmful 
substance abuse information to all pregnant, postpartum, and 
breastfeeding women and to parents or caretakers of infants and children 
participating in the program. Drug and other harmful substance abuse 
information may also be provided to pregnant, postpartum, and 
breastfeeding women and to parents or caretakers of infants and children 
participating in local agency services other than the Program.
    (b) Goals. Nutrition education shall be designed to achieve the 
following two broad goals:
    (1) Stress the relationship between proper nutrition and good health 
with special emphasis on the nutritional needs of pregnant, postpartum, 
and breastfeeding women, infants and children under five years of age, 
and raise awareness about the dangers of using drugs and other harmful 
substances during pregnancy and while breastfeeding.
    (2) Assist the individual who is at nutritional risk in achieving a 
positive change in food habits, resulting in improved nutritional status 
and in the prevention of nutrition-related problems through optimal use 
of the supplemental foods and other nutritious foods. This is to be 
taught in the context of the ethnic, cultural and geographic preferences 
of the participants and with consideration for educational and 
environmental limitations experienced by the participants.
    (c) State agency responsibilities. The State agency shall perform 
the following activities in carrying out nutrition education 
responsibilities:
    (1) Develop and coordinate the nutrition education component of 
Program operations with consideration of local agency plans, needs and 
available nutrition education resources.
    (2) Provide in-service training and technical assistance for 
professional and para-professional personnel involved in providing 
nutrition education to participants at local agencies. The State agency 
shall also provide training on the promotion and management of 
breastfeeding to staff at local agencies who will provide information 
and assistance on this subject to participants.
    (3) Identify or develop resources and educational materials for use 
in local agencies, including breastfeeding promotion and instruction 
materials, taking reasonable steps to include materials in languages 
other than English in areas where a significant number or proportion of 
the population needs the information in a language other than English, 
considering the size and concentration of such population and,

[[Page 301]]

where possible, the reading level of participants.
    (4) Develop and implement procedures to ensure that nutrition 
education is offered to all adult participants and to parents and 
guardians of infant or child participants, as well as child 
participants, whenever possible.
    (5) Annually perform and document evaluations of nutrition education 
and breastfeeding promotion and support activities.

The evaluations shall include an assessment of participants' views 
concerning the effectiveness of the nutrition education and 
breastfeeding promotion and support they received.
    (6) Monitor local agency activities to ensure compliance with 
provisions set forth in paragraphs (c)(8), (d), and (e) of this section.
    (7) Establish standards for participant contacts that ensure 
adequate nutrition education in accordance with paragraph (e) of this 
section.
    (8) Establish standards for breastfeeding promotion and support 
which include, at a minimum, the following:
    (i) A policy that creates a positive clinic environment which 
endorses breastfeeding as the preferred method of infant feeding;
    (ii) A requirement that each local agency designate a staff person 
to coordinate breastfeeding promotion and support activities;
    (iii) A requirement that each local agency incorporate task-
appropriate breastfeeding promotion and support training into 
orientation programs for new staff involved in direct contact with WIC 
clients; and
    (iv) A plan to ensure that women have access to breastfeeding 
promotion and support activities during the prenatal and postpartum 
periods.
    (d) Local agency responsibilities. Local agencies shall perform the 
following activities in carrying out their nutrition education 
responsibilities:
    (1) Make nutrition education available or enter into an agreement 
with another agency to make nutrition education available to all adult 
participants, and to parents or caretakers of infant and child 
participants, and whenever possible, to child participants. Nutrition 
education may be provided through the use of individual or group 
sessions. Educational materials designed for Program participants may be 
utilized to provide education to pregnant, postpartum, and breastfeeding 
women and to parents or caretakers of infants and children participating 
in local agency services other than the program.
    (2) Develop an annual local agency nutrition education plan 
consistent with the State's nutrition education component of Program 
operations and in accordance with this part and FCS guidelines. The 
local agency shall submit its nutrition education plan to the State 
agency by a date specified by the State agency.
    (e) Participant contacts. (1) The nutrition education contacts shall 
be made available through individual or group sessions which are 
appropriate to the individual participant's nutritional needs. All 
pregnant participants shall be encouraged to breastfeed unless 
contraindicated for health reasons.
    (2) During each six-month certification period, at least two 
nutrition contacts shall be made available to all adult participants and 
the parents or caretakers of infant and child participants, and wherever 
possible, the child participants themselves.
    (3) Nutrition education contacts shall be made available at a 
quarterly rate, but not necessarily taking place within each quarter, to 
parents or caretakers of infant participants certified for a period in 
excess of six months.
    (4) The local agency shall document in each participant's 
certification file that nutrition education has been given to the 
participant in accordance with State agency standards, except that the 
second or any subsequent nutrition education contact during a 
certification period that is provided to a participant in a group 
setting may be documented in a masterfile. Should a participant miss a 
nutrition education appointment, the local agency shall, for purposes of 
monitoring and further education efforts, document this fact in the 
participant's file, or, at the local agency's discretion, in the case of 
a second or subsequent missed contact where the nutrition education was 
offered in a group setting, document this fact in a master file.

[[Page 302]]

    (5) An individual care plan shall be provided for a participant 
based on the need for such plan as determined by the competent 
professional authority, except that any participant, parent, or 
caretaker shall receive such plan upon request.
    (6) Contacts shall be designed to meet different cultural and 
language needs of Program participants.

[50 FR 6121, Feb. 13, 1985; 50 FR 8098, Feb. 28, 1985, as amended at 58 
FR 11507, Feb. 26, 1993; 59 FR 11503, Mar. 11, 1994]


<R04>
                   Subpart E--State Agency Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 246.12  Food delivery systems.

    (a) General. This section sets forth design and operational 
requirements for State and local agency food delivery systems.
    (1) The State agency is responsible for the fiscal management of, 
and accountability for, food delivery systems under its jurisdiction.
    (2) The State agency shall design all food delivey systems to be 
used by local agencies under its jurisdiction.
    (3) FCS may, for a stated cause and by written notice, require 
revision of a proposed or operating food delivery system and will allow 
a reasonable time for the State agency to effect such a revision.
    (4) All contracts or agreements entered into by the State or local 
agency for the management or operation of food delivery systems shall be 
in conformance with the requirements of 7 CFR part 3016.
    (b) Uniform food delivery systems. The State agency may operate up 
to three types of food delivery systems--retail purchase, home delivery 
or direct distribution. Each system shall be procedurally uniform within 
the jurisdiction of the State agency. When used, food instruments shall 
be uniform within each type of system.
    (c) Free of charge. Participants shall receive the Program's 
supplemental foods free of charge.
    (d) Compatibility of food delivery system. The State agency shall 
ensure that the food delivery system is compatible with delivery of 
health and nutrition education services to the participants.
    (e) Authorization of food vendors. Only food vendors authorized by 
the State agency may redeem food intruments or otherwise provide 
supplemental foods to participants.
    (1) There shall be a documented on-site visit prior to, or at the 
time of, initial authorization of a new vendor. However, vendors 
authorized prior to the date of State implementation of the amendment to 
Program regulations published at 47 FR 23626 need not have a documented 
visit.
    (2) The State agency shall authorize an appropriate number and 
distribution of food vendors in order to assure adequate participant 
convenience and access and to assure that State or local officials can 
effectively manage review of authorized food vendors in their 
jurisdiction. The State agency may establish criteria to limit the 
number of authorized food vendors in its jurisdiction.
    (3) The State agency is encouraged to consider the impact of 
authorization decisions on small businesses.
    (f) Food vendor agreements. The State agency shall ensure that all 
participating food vendors enter into written contracts or agreements 
with the State or local agency. The food vendor contract or agreement 
shall be signed by a representative who has legal authority to obligate 
the food vendor. When the food vendor is obligating more than one 
outlet, all outlets shall be specified in the contract or agreement. 
When more than one outlet is specified in the contract or agreement, an 
individual outlet may be added or deleted without affecting the 
remainder of outlets. Neither the State or local agency nor the vendor 
has an obligation to renew the vendor contract or agreement. The State 
or local agency shall provide vendors with not less than 15 days advance 
written notice of the expiration of a contract or agreement.
    (1) In the retail purchase system, a standard vendor contract or 
agreement shall be used statewide, though exceptions may be made with 
the approval of the State agency.
    (2) The food vendor contract or agreement shall contain the 
following specifications, although the State agency may determine the 
exact wording to be used:

[[Page 303]]

    (i) In providing supplemental foods to the participants, the food 
vendor shall only provide the supplemental foods specified on the food 
instrument.
    (ii) The food vendor shall provide supplemental foods at the current 
price or at less than the current price charged to other customers.
    (iii) When food instruments are used, the food vendor shall submit 
those food instruments for payment within the allowed time period and 
accept food instruments from a participant only within the allowed time 
period.
    (iv) The State agency has the right to demand refunds for charges of 
more than the actual purchase price for supplemental foods.
    (v) The State agency may deny payment to the food vendor for 
improper food instruments or may demand refunds for payments already 
made on improper food instruments.
    (vi) The food vendor shall not seek restitution from participants 
for food instruments not paid by the State or local agency.
    (vii) The manager of the store or an authorized representative such 
as the head cashier shall agree to accept training on Program 
procedures.
    (viii) The food vendor shall inform and train cashiers or other 
staff on Program requirements.
    (ix) The food vendor shall be accountable for actions of employees 
in the utilization of food instruments or provision of supplemental 
foods.
    (x) The food vendor shall offer Program participants the same 
courtesies as offered to other customers.
    (xi) The food vendor may be monitored for compliance with Program 
rules.
    (xii) During a monitoring visit of a retail vendor, the food vendor 
shall provide access to food instruments negotiated the day of the 
review at the request of the reviewer.
    (xiii) Retail vendors shall provide access to shelf price records, 
if available.
    (xiv) A vendor who commits fraud or abuse of the Program is liable 
to prosecution under applicable Federal, State or local laws. Under 
Sec. 246.23 of the regulations, those who have willfully misapplied, 
stolen or fraudulently obtained program funds shall be subject to a fine 
of not more than $10,000 or imprisonment for not more than five years or 
both, if the value of the funds is $100 or more. If the value is less 
than $100, the penalties are a fine of not more than $1,000 or 
imprisonment for not more than one year or both.
    (xv) The food vendor shall comply with the nondiscrimination 
provisions of Departmental regulations (7 CFR parts 15, 15a and 15b).
    (xvi) Neither the State agency nor the food vendor has an obligation 
to renew the vendor contract or agreement.
    (xvii) Either the State agency or the vendor may terminate the 
contract or agreement for cause after providing advance written notice, 
of a period of not less than 15 days to be specified by the State 
agency.
    (xviii) The State agency may disqualify a food vendor for reasons of 
Program abuse. The vendor has the right to appeal a State agency 
decision pertaining to denial of application to participate, vendor 
disqualification or any other adverse action which affects participation 
during the contract or agreement performance period. Expiration of a 
contract or agreement with a food vendor is not subject to appeal.
    (xix) The food vendor shall notify the State agency when the vendor 
ceases operations or ownership changes. The contract or agreement is 
null and void if the ownership changes.
    (xx) The food vendor shall not collect sales tax on WIC food 
purchases.
    (3) Other provisions shall be added to the contracts or agreements 
to implement State agency options in paragraphs (k)(1)(iii), (k)(1)(iv), 
and (s)(5)(iv) of this section.
    (g) Periodic review of food vendor qualifications. The State agency 
shall conduct a periodic review of the qualifications of all authorized 
food vendors under its jurisdiction, at least once every two years. The 
State agency shall establish criteria used to assess the adequacy of all 
food vendor qualifications. Based upon the results of such reviews the 
State agency shall make appropriate adjustments among the participating 
food vendors, such as termination of agreements.
    (h) Food vendor training and guidelines. The State agency shall 
ensure that training is provided by the State

[[Page 304]]

or local agency for participating food vendors. The training shall be 
designed to prevent Program errors or abuse and to improve Program 
service.
    (1) When vendor training is delegated to the local agency, the State 
agency shall provide training to local agency staff on effective vendor 
training methods.
    (2) Food vendors shall be provided with pertinent Program 
information and guidance concerning the authorized supplemental foods, 
including a list of acceptable brand name products.
    (i) Monitoring of food vendors. The State agency shall be 
responsible for the monitoring of food vendors within its jurisdiction. 
If the State agency chooses to delegate all or part of this 
responsibility to local agencies, the State agency shall provide 
training to local agency staff in effective methods of vendor 
monitoring.
    (1) The State agency shall design and implement a system to identify 
high risk vendors and ensure on-site monitoring, further investigation, 
and sanctioning of such vendors as appropriate. Criteria for identifying 
high risk vendors may include such considerations as level and/or 
severity of suspected overcharges in redeemed food instruments, errors 
in redeemed food instruments, or participant complaints.
    (2) The State agency shall design and implement a system to conduct 
on-site monitoring visits to at least 10 percent of authorized food 
vendors per year, selected on a representative basis, in order to survey 
the types and levels of abuse and errors among participating food 
vendors and to take corrective action, as appropriate. The State agency 
may submit an alternate representative vendor monitoring plan, based on 
statistical sampling methods, for FCS approval.
    (3) A summary of the results of the monitoring of high risk and 
representative food vendors and of the review of food instruments shall 
be submitted annually to FCS and within four months after the end of 
each fiscal year. Plans for improvement in the coming year shall be 
included in the State Plan, in accordance with Sec. 246.4.
    (4) The following shall be documented for all on-site vendor 
monitoring visits, at a minimum: Names of both vendor and reviewer; date 
of review; nature of problem(s) detected or the observation that the 
vendor appears to be in compliance with Program requirements; how the 
vendor plans to correct deficiencies detected; and the signature of the 
reviewer. Methods of on-site monitoring visits may include, but are not 
limited to: compliance purchases, review of cashier check-out 
procedures, review of inventory records, and review of the availability 
and prices of Program supplemental foods.
    (5) The State agency shall have the capability to conduct compliance 
purchases to collect evidence of improper vendor practices, or shall 
arrange for this responsibility to be assumed by the proper State or 
local authorities.
    (j) Participant and vendor complaints. The State agency shall have 
procedures which document the handling of complaints by participants and 
vendors. Complaints of civil rights discrimination shall be handled in 
accordance with Sec. 246.8(b).
    (k) Participant and vendor sanctions. (1) The State agency shall 
establish policies which determine the type and level of sanctions to be 
applied against food vendors, based upon the severity and nature of the 
Program violations observed, and such other factors as the State agency 
determines appropriate, such as whether the violation represented 
repeated offenses over a period of time, whether the offenses 
represented vendor policy or whether they represented the actions of an 
individual employee who did not understand Program rules, and whether 
prior warning and an opportunity for correction was provided to the 
vendor. Vendor offenses which are subject to sanctions shall include at 
least the following: Providing cash, unauthorized foods or other items 
to participants in lieu of authorized supplemental foods; charging the 
State or local agency for foods not received by the participant; and 
charging the State or local agency more for supplemental foods than 
other customers are charged for the same food item. The State agency 
shall provide adequate procedures for vendors to

[[Page 305]]

appeal a disqualification from participation under the Program as 
specified in Sec. 246.18.
    (i) Food vendors may be subject to sanctions in addition to, or in 
lieu of, disqualification, such as claims for improper or overcharged 
food instruments and the penalties outlined in Sec. 246.23, in case of 
deliberate fraud.
    (ii) The period of disqualification from Program participation shall 
be a reasonable period of time, not to exceed three years. The maximum 
period of disqualification shall be imposed only for serious or repeated 
Program abuse.
    (iii) The State agency may disqualify a food vendor from the Program 
who is currently disqualified from another FCS program. If a State 
agency chooses to use this opion, it shall include a provision to this 
effect in its vendor agreement, in accordance with paragraph (f) of this 
section.
    (iv) The State agency may disqualify a vendor who has been assessed 
a civil money penalty in the Food Stamp Program in lieu of 
disqualification, as provided in 7 CFR 278.6, only if the State agency:
    (A) Documents that any such disqualification will not create undue 
hardship for participants; and
    (B) Includes notification that it will take such disqualification 
action in its vendor agreement, in accordance with paragraph (f)(3) of 
this section.
    (v) Prior to disqualifying a food vendor, the State agency shall 
consider whether the disqualification would create undue hardships for 
participants.
    (2) The State agency shall establish procedures designed to control 
participant abuse of the program. Participant abuse includes, but is not 
limited to, intentionally making false or misleading statement or 
intentionally misrepresenting, concealing or withholding facts to obtain 
benefits; sale of supplemental foods or food instruments to, or exchange 
with, other individuals or entities; receipt from food vendors of cash 
or credit toward purchase of unauthorized food or other items of value 
in lieu of authorized supplemental foods; and physical abuse, or threat 
of physical abuse, of clinic or vendor staff. The State agency shall 
establish sanctions for participant abuse. Such sanctions may, at the 
discretion of the State agency, include disqualification from the 
Program for a period up to three months. Warnings may be given prior to 
the imposition of sanctions. Before a participant is disqualified from 
the Program for alleged abuse, that participant shall be given full 
opportunity to appeal a disqualification as set forth in Sec. 246.9.
    (3) The State agency shall refer food vendors and participants who 
abuse the Program to Federal, State or local authorities for prosecution 
under applicable statutes, where appropriate.
    (l) Control of food instruments. The State agency shall control and 
provide accountability for the receipt and issuance of supplemental 
foods and food instruments. The State agency shall ensure that there is 
secure transportation and storage of unissued food instruments.
    (m) Payment to food vendors. The State agency shall ensure that food 
vendors are promptly paid for food costs. Payments for valid food 
instruments shall be made within 60 days after receipt of the food 
instruments. Actual payment to food vendors may be made by local 
agencies.
    (n) Reconciliation of food instruments. The State agency shall 
identify disposition of all food instruments as: Validly redeemed, lost 
or stolen, expired, duplicate, voided or not matching issuance records. 
Reconciliation of food instruments shall entail reconciliation of each 
food instrument issued with food instruments redeemed and adjustment of 
previously reported financial obligations to account for actual 
redemptions and other changes in the status of food instruments.
    (1) Reconciliation of food instruments shall be performed within 150 
days of the first valid date for participant use and shall be in 
accordance with the financial management requirements of Sec. 246.13.
    (2) The State agency shall be able to demonstrate to FCS its 
capability to reconcile a given redeemed food instrument to valid 
certification records.
    (o) Recipients of food instruments. The State agency shall ensure 
that each participate or representative signs a receipt for supplemental 
foods or food instruments. This requirement shall

[[Page 306]]

not pertain to systems which deliver food instruments by alternate means 
pursuant to paragraph (r)(8) of this section, such as by mailing. The 
State agency shall establish uniform procedures which allow proxies 
designated by participants to act on their behalf. In determining 
whether an individual participant should be allowed to designate a proxy 
or proxies, there shall be consideration of whether there are adequate 
measures for the provision of nutrition education and health services to 
that participant.
    (p) Instructions to recipients. The State agency shall ensure that 
participants and their proxies receive instructions on the proper use of 
food instruments, or on the procedures for receiving supplemental foods. 
Participants and their proxies shall also be notified that they have the 
right to complain about improper vendor practices with regard to Program 
responsibilities.
    (q) Conflict of interest. The State agency shall ensure that no 
conflict of interest exists between any local agency and the food vendor 
or vendors within the local agency's jurisdiction.
    (r) Retail purchase systems. Retail purchase food delivery systems 
are systems in which participants obtain supplemental foods by 
submitting a food instrument to local retail outlets. All retail 
purchase food delivery systems shall meet the following requirements:
    (1) The State agency shall use uniform food instruments within its 
jurisdiction. The State agency is responsible for the design and 
printing of the uniform food instruments, and their serialization.
    (2) Each food instrument shall clearly bear on its face the 
following information:
    (i) The first date on which the food instrument may be used by the 
participant to obtain supplemental foods.
    (ii) The last date by which the participant may use the food 
instrument to obtain supplemental foods. This date shall be a minimum of 
30 days from the date specified in paragraph (r)(2)(i) of this section 
or, for the participant's first month of issuance, it may be the end of 
the month or cycle for which the food instrument is valid. Rather than 
entering a specific expiration date on each instrument, all instruments 
may be printed with a notice that the participant must transact them 
within a specified number of days after the first date on which the 
instrument may be used.
    (iii) An expiration date by which the food vendor is required to 
submit the food instrument for payment. This date shall be no more than 
90 days from the date specified in paragraph (r)(2)(i) of this section. 
If the date is less than 90 days, then the State agency shall ensure 
that the food vendor is able to submit food instruments for redemption 
within the required time limit without undue burden. This date may 
otherwise be printed as being no more than 90 days after the date in 
paragraph (r)(2)(i) of this section.
    (iv) A unique and sequential serial number.
    (v) At the discretion of the State agency, a maximum purchase price 
which is higher than the price of the food for which it will be used, 
but low enough to be a reasonable protection against potential losses of 
funds. When the maximum value is shown, the space for the actual value 
of the supplemental foods purchased shall be clearly distinguishable. 
For example, the words ``actual amount of sale'' could be printed larger 
and in a different area of the food instrument than the maximum value.
    (3) The State agency shall implement requirements to ensure that the 
actual purchase price of the supplemental foods is recorded at the time 
of purchase. For example, the State agency may require that the food 
vendor write the purchase price on the food instrument prior to the 
signature of the participant.
    (4) The State agency shall implement procedures to ensure that every 
redeemed food instrument can be identified to the food vendor which 
redeemed the food instrument. If the vendor utilizes outlets, all 
outlets participating in the Program shall be identified. For example, 
the State agency may require that all authorized food vendors stamp 
their names on all redeemed food instruments prior to submission.
    (5) The State agency shall establish procedures to ensure the 
propriety of redeemed food instruments.

[[Page 307]]

    (i) The State agency shall design and implement a system of review 
of food instrument to detect suspected overcharges and to identify food 
vendors with high levels of suspected overcharges.
    (ii) The State agency shall design and implement a system of review 
of food instruments to detect errors, including, at least, purchase 
price missing, participant signature missing, vendor identification 
missing, redemption by vendor outside of the valid date and, as 
appropriate, altered prices. The State agency shall implement procedures 
to reduce the number of errors, where possible.
    (iii) When payment for a food instrument is denied or delayed, or a 
claim for reimbursement is assessed, the affected food vendor shall have 
an opportunity to correct or justify the overcharge or error. For 
example, if the actual price is missing, the vendor may demonstrate what 
price should have been included. If the State agency is satisfied with 
the correction or justification, then it shall provide payment, or 
adjust the payment or claim to the vendor accordingly.
    (iv) If a claim is assessed against a food vendor after the problem 
food instrument has been paid, the State agency may offset future 
payments to the food vendor for the amount of the claim. If a State 
agency chooses to utilize this option, it shall include a provision to 
this effect in its vendor agreement, in accordance with paragraph (f) of 
this section.
    (6) With justification and documentation, State agencies may 
reimburse food vendors for food instruments submitted after the 
expiration date. If the total value of the food instruments submitted at 
one time exceeds $200.00, reimbursement may not be made without the 
approval of the FCS Regional Office.
    (7) The State agency shall ensure that no more than a three-month 
supply of food instruments is issued to any participant at one time and 
that nutrition education and health services are frequently made 
available to the participant.
    (8) Participants or their authorized proxies shall personally pick 
up food instruments when scheduled for nutrition education or for an 
appointment to determine whether participants are eligible for a second 
or subsequent certification period. However, in all other circumstances 
the State agency may provide for issuance of food instruments through an 
alternative means, such as electronic benefit transfer (EBT) or mailing, 
unless FCS determines that such action would jeopardize the integrity of 
program services or program accountability. If a State agency opts to 
mail WIC food instruments, it must provide justification, as part of the 
description of its alternative issuance system in its State plan, as 
required in Sec. 246.4(a)(21), for mailing WIC food instruments to areas 
where food stamps are not mailed.

State agencies which opt to mail food instruments must establish and 
implement a system which ensures the return of food instruments to the 
State or local agency if the participant no longer resides or receives 
mail at the address to which the food instruments were mailed.
    (s) Home food delivery systems. Home food delivery systems are 
systems in which food is delivered to the participant's home. Systems 
for home delivery of food shall provide for--
    (1) Uniform food instruments, where applicable, which comply with 
the appropriate requirements set forth in paragraph (s) of this section;
    (2) Procurement of supplemental foods in accordance with 
Sec. 246.24, which may entail measures such as the purchase of food in 
bulk lots by the State agency and the use of discounts that are 
available to States. The selection of home delivery vendors that are 
given exclusive contracts to an area shall conform to requirements of 7 
CFR part 3016; and
    (3) The accountable delivery of supplemental foods to participants. 
The State agency shall ensure that--
    (i) Home delivery vendors are paid only after the delivery of 
supplemental foods to the participants;
    (ii) There exists a routine procedure to verify the actual delivery 
of supplemental foods to participants. At a minimum, such verification 
must occur at least once a month; and
    (iii) There is retention of records of delivery of supplemental 
foods and

[[Page 308]]

bills sent or payments received for such supplemental foods for at least 
three years and access of State, local and/or Federal authorities to 
such records.
    (t) Direct distribution systems. Direct distribution food delivery 
systems are systems in which participants pick up food from storage 
facilities operated by the State or local agency. Systems for direct 
distribution of food shall provide for--
    (1) Uniform food instruments, where applicable, which comply with 
the appropriate requirements set forth under paragraph (s) of this 
section;
    (2) Adequate storage and insurance coverage that minimizes the 
danger of loss due to theft, infestation, fire, spoilage, or other 
causes;
    (3) Adequate inventory control of food received, in stock, and 
issued;
    (4) Procurement of supplemental foods in accordance with 
Sec. 246.24, which may entail measures such as purchase of food in bulk 
lots by the State agency and the use of discounts that are available to 
States;
    (5) The availability of Program benefits to participants and 
potential participants who live at great distance from storage 
facilities; and
    (6) The accountable delivery of supplemental foods to participants.

[50 FR 6121, Feb. 13, 1985, as amended at 52 FR 21237, June 4, 1987; 53 
FR 35301, Sept. 13, 1988; 54 FR 51295, Dec. 14, 1989; 59 FR 11503, Mar. 
11, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 246.13  Financial management system.

    (a) Disclosure of expenditures. The State agency shall maintain a 
financial management system which provides accurate, current and 
complete disclosure of the financial status of the Program. This shall 
include an accounting for all property and other assets and all Program 
funds received and expended each fiscal year.
    (b) Internal control. The State agency shall maintain effective 
control over and accountability for all Program grants and funds. The 
State agency must have effective internal controls to ensure that 
expenditures financed with Program funds are authorized and properly 
chargeable to the Program.
    (c) Record of expenditures. The State agency shall maintain records 
which adequately identify the source and use of funds expended for 
Program activities. These records shall contain, but are not limited to, 
information pertaining to authorization, receipt of funds, obligations, 
unobligated balances, assets, liabilities, outlays, and income.
    (d) Payment of costs. The State shall implement procedures which 
ensure prompt and accurate payment of allowable costs, and ensure the 
allowability and allocability of costs in accordance with the cost 
principles and standard provisions of this part, 7 CFR part 3016, and 
FCS guidelines and instructions.
    (e) Identification of obligated funds. The State agency shall 
implement procedures which accurately identify obligated Program funds 
at the time the obligations are made.
    (f) Resolution of audit findings. The State agency shall implement 
procedures which ensure timely and appropriate resolution of claims and 
other matters resulting from audit findings and recommendations.
    (g) Use of minority- and women-owned banks. Consistent with the 
national goals of expanding opportunities for minority business 
enterprises, State and local agencies are encouraged to use minority- 
and women-owned banks.
    (h) Reconciliation of food instruments. The State agency shall 
reconcile food instruments in accordance with Sec. 246.12(n).
    (i) Transfer of cash. The State agency shall have controls to 
minimize the time elapsing between receipt of Federal funds from the 
U.S. Department of Treasury and the disbursements of these funds for 
Program costs. In the Letter of Credit system, the State agency shall 
make drawdowns from the U.S. Department of Treasury's Regional 
Disbursing Office as close as possible to the actual date that 
disbursement of funds is made. Advances made by the State agency to 
local agencies shall also conform to these same standards.
    (j) Local agency financial management. The State agency shall ensure 
that all local agencies develop and implement a financial management 
system consistent with requirements prescribed by

[[Page 309]]

FCS and the State agency pursuant to the requirements of this section.

[50 FR 6121, Feb. 13, 1985; 50 FR 8098, Feb. 28, 1985]


<R05>
Sec. 246.14  Program costs.

    (a) General. (1) The two kinds of allowable costs under the Program 
are ``food costs'' and ``nutrition services and administration costs.'' 
In general, costs necessary to the fulfillment of Program objectives are 
to be considered allowable costs. The two types of nutrition services 
and administration costs are:
    (i) Direct costs. Those direct costs that are allowable under 7 CFR 
part 3016.
    (ii) Indirect costs. Those indirect costs that are allowable under 7 
CFR part 3016. When computing indirect costs, food costs may not be used 
in the base to which the indirect cost rate is applied. In accordance 
with the provisions of 7 CFR part 3016, a claim for indirect costs shall 
be supported by an approved allocation plan for the determination of 
allowable indirect costs.
    (2) Except as provided in paragraph (e) of this section and 
Secs. 246.16(g) and 246.16(h) of this part, funds allocated by FCS for 
food purchases may not be used to pay nutrition services and 
administration costs. However, nutrition services and administration 
funds may be used to pay for food costs.
    (b) Specified allowable food costs. Food costs are the acquisition 
cost of the supplemental foods provided to State or local agencies or to 
participants, whichever receives foods first, except the warehouse 
facilities costs shall be considered as an allowable food cost. The 
State agency shall ensure that food costs do not exceed the food 
vendor's customary sale price. Food example, in retail purchase systems, 
food costs may not exceed the shelf price of the food provided.
    (c) Specified allowable nutrition services and administration costs. 
Allowable nutrition services and administration (NSA) costs include the 
following:
    (1) The cost of nutrition education and breastfeeding promotion and 
support which meets the requirements of Sec. 246.11. During each fiscal 
year, each State agency shall expend for nutrition education activities 
and breastfeeding promotion and support activities, an aggregate amount 
that is not less than the sum of one-sixth of the amount expended by the 
State agency for costs of NSA, and an amount equal to a proportionate 
share of $8 million targeted specifically for breastfeeding promotion 
and support activities. Each State agency's share of the $8 million 
shall be determined on the basis of the average monthly number of 
pregnant and breastfeeding women served by a WIC State agency as a 
percentage of the average monthly number of pregnant and breastfeeding 
women served by all WIC State agencies. The amount to be spent on 
nutrition education shall be computed by taking one-sixth of the total 
fiscal year NSA expenditures. The amount spent by a State agency on 
breastfeeding promotion and support activities shall be at least an 
amount that is equal to its proportionate share of the $8 million as 
specified in this paragraph. If the State agency's total reported 
nutrition education and breastfeeding promotion and support expenditures 
are less than the required amount of expenditures, the Department will 
issue a claim for the difference. The State agency may also request 
prior written permission from the Department to spend less than the 
required portions of its NSA grant for either nutrition education or for 
breastfeeding promotion and support activities. The Department may grant 
such permission if the State agency has documented that other resources, 
including in-kind resources, will be used to conduct these activities at 
a level commensurate with the requirements of this paragraph. Such 
requests should be submitted to the appropriate FCS regional office for 
approval. Nutrition education costs are limited to activities which are 
distinct and separate efforts to help participants understand the 
importance of nutrition to health. The cost of dietary assessments for 
the purpose of certification, the cost of prescribing and issuing 
supplemental foods, the cost of screening for drug and other harmful 
substance use and making referrals to drug and other harmful substance 
abuse services, and the cost of other health-related screening shall not 
be applied to the expenditure requirement

[[Page 310]]

for nutrition education and breastfeeding promotion and support 
activities. The Department shall advise State agencies regarding methods 
for minimizing documentation of the nutrition education and 
breastfeeding promotion and support expenditure requirement. Costs to be 
applied to the one-sixth minimum amount required to be spent on 
nutrition education and the target share of funds required to be spent 
on breastfeeding promotion and support include, but need not be limited 
to--
    (i) Salary and other costs for time spent on nutrition education and 
breastfeeding promotion and support consultations whether with an 
individual or group;
    (ii) The cost of procuring and producing nutrition education and 
breastfeeding promotion and support materials including handouts, flip 
charts, filmstrips, projectors, food models or other teaching aids, and 
the cost of mailing nutrition education or breastfeeding promotion and 
support materials to participants;
    (iii) The cost of training nutrition or breastfeeding promotion and 
support educators, including costs related to conducting training 
sessions and purchasing and producing training materials;
    (iv) The cost of conducting evaluations of nutrition education or 
breastfeeding promotion and support activities, including evaluations 
conducted by contractors;
    (v) Salary and other costs incurred in developing the nutrition 
education and breastfeeding promotion and support portion of the State 
Plan and local agency nutrition education and breastfeeding promotion 
and support plans; and
    (vi) The cost of monitoring nutrition education and breastfeeding 
promotion and support activities.
    (2) The cost of Program certification procedures, including the 
following--
    (i) Laboratory fees incurred for tests conducted to determine 
whether persons are at nutritional risk;
    (ii) Expendable medical supplies necessary to determine whether 
persons are at nutritional risk;
    (iii) In connection with nutritional risk determinations, medical 
equipment used for taking anthropometric measurements, such as scales, 
measuring boards, and skin fold calipers; and for blood analysis to 
detect anemia, such as spectrophotometers, hematofluorometers and 
centrifuges; and
    (iv) Salary and other costs for time spent on certification.
    (3) The cost of outreach services.
    (4) The cost of administering the food delivery system, including 
the cost of transporting food.
    (5) The cost of translators for materials and interpreters.
    (6) The cost of fair hearings, including the cost of an independent 
medical assessment of the appellant, if necessary.
    (7) The cost of transporting rural participants to clinics when 
prior approval for using Program funds to provide transportation has 
been granted by the State agency and documentation that such service is 
considered essential to assure Program access has been filed at the 
State agency. Direct reimbursement to participants for transportation 
cost is not an allowable cost.
    (8) The cost of monitoring and reviewing Program operations.
    (9) The cost, exclusive of laboratory tests, of screening for drug 
and other harmful substance use and making referrals for counseling and 
treatment services.
    (10) The cost of breastfeeding aids which directly support the 
initiation and continuation of breastfeeding.
    (d) Costs allowable with approval. The following costs are allowable 
only with the prior approval of FCS:
    (1) Automated information systems which are required by a State or 
local agency except for those used in general management and payroll, 
including acquisition of automatic data processing hardware or software 
whether by outright purchase, rental-purchase agreement or other method 
of acquisition. Approval shall be granted by FCS if the proposed system 
meets the requirements of this part, A-130, and 7 CFR part 3016. At the 
time the State agency decides to seek computerization, except for use in 
general management or payroll, it shall inform FCS and seek approval, if 
required.

[[Page 311]]

    (2) Capital expenditures over $2,500.00, such as the cost of 
facilities, equipment, including medical equipment, other capital assets 
and any repairs that materially increase the value of useful life of 
capital assets.
    (3) Management studies performed by agencies or departments other 
than the State or local agency or those performed by outside consultants 
under contract with the State or local agency.
    (e) Recovery of vendor claims. The State agency shall retain funds 
collected by the recovery of claims assessed against food vendors or 
funds not paid to food vendors as a result of reviews of food 
instruments prior to payment. The State agency may use up to 50 percent 
of these funds for nutrition services and administration purposes, 
provided that the base amount from which the percentage may be taken is 
not established until after the vendor has had full opportunity to 
correct or justify the error or apparent overcharge in accordance with 
Sec. 246.12(s)(5)(iii). The State agency shall not transfer any such 
funds from its food account to its nutrition services and administration 
account until after the vendor has exercised this right, if the vendor 
chooses to do so. After such funds have been transferred, the remainder 
shall be used to pay food costs. When these funds are used for nutrition 
services and administration purposes, the State agency shall report such 
expenditures to FCS through routine reporting procedures. The State 
agency shall maintain documentation to support the level of funds 
retained under this paragraph by the State agency for nutrition services 
and administration purposes.

[50 FR 6121, Feb. 13, 1987, as amended at 52 FR 21237, June 4, 1987; 53 
FR 25314, July 6, 1988; 54 FR 18091, Apr. 27, 1989; 58 FR 11507, Feb. 
26, 1993; 59 FR 11503, Mar. 11, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 246.15  Program income other than grants.

    (a) Interest earned on advances. State and local agencies and 
clinics may retain interest earned on advances of Program funds in 
accordance with the provisions of 7 CFR part 3016.
    (b) Other Program income. The State agency may use current Program 
income for costs incurred in the current fiscal year and, with the 
approval of FCS, for costs incurred in previous or subsequent fiscal 
years. With the approval of FCS, Program income may be used for costs 
which are in addition to the allowable costs of the Program but which 
nevertheless further the objectives of the law authorizing the Program. 
Provided that the costs supported by the income further the broad 
objectives of the Program, they need not be a kind that would be 
permissible as charges to Federal funds.


<R05>
Sec. 246.16  Distribution of funds.

    (a) General. This paragraph describes the timeframes for 
distribution of appropriated funds by the Department to participating 
State agencies and the authority for the Secretary to use appropriated 
funds for evaluation studies and demonstration projects.
    (1) Authorized appropriations to carry out the provisions of this 
section may be made not more than 1 year in advance of the beginning of 
the fiscal year in which the funds shall become available for 
disbursement to the State agencies. The funds shall remain available for 
the purposes for which appropriated until expended.
    (2) In the case of appropriations legislation providing funds 
through the end of a fiscal year, the Secretary shall issue to State 
agencies an initial allocation of funds provided under such legislation 
not later than the expiration of the 15-day period beginning on the date 
of the enactment and subsequent allocation of funds shall be issued not 
later than the beginning of each of the second, third and fourth 
quarters of the fiscal year.
    (3) Allocations of funds pursuant to paragraph (a)(2) of this 
section shall be made as follows: The initial allocation of funds to 
State agencies shall include not less than \1/3\ of the appropriated 
amounts for the fiscal year. The allocation of funds to be made not 
later than the beginning of the second and third quarters shall each 
include not less than \1/4\ of the appropriated amounts for the fiscal 
year.
    (4) In the case of legislation providing funds for a period that 
ends prior to the end of a fiscal year, the Secretary shall issue to 
State agencies an initial

[[Page 312]]

allocation of funds not later than the expiration of the 10-day period 
beginning on the date of enactment. In the case of legislation providing 
appropriations for a period of not more than 4 months, all funds must be 
allocated to State agencies except those reserved by the Secretary to 
carry out paragraph (a)(6) of this section.
    (5) In any fiscal year unused amounts from a prior fiscal year that 
are identified by the end of the first quarter of the fiscal year shall 
be recovered and reallocated not later than the beginning of the second 
quarter of the fiscal year. Unused amounts from a prior fiscal year that 
are identified after the end of the first quarter of the fiscal year 
shall be recovered and reallocated on a timely basis.
    (6) Up to one-half of one percent of the sums appropriated for each 
fiscal year, not to exceed $5,000,000, shall be available to the 
Secretary for the purpose of evaluating program performance, evaluating 
health benefits, providing technical assistance to improve State agency 
administrative systems preparing the biennial Participation Report to 
Congress described in Sec. 246.25(b)(3) of this part, and administering 
pilot projects, including projects designed to meet the special needs of 
migrants, Indians, and rural populations.
    (b) Distribution and application of grant funds to State agencies. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, funds made available to the 
State agencies for the Program in any fiscal year will be managed and 
distributed as follows:
    (1) The State agency shall ensure that all Program funds are used 
only for Program purposes. As a prerequisite to the receipt of funds, 
the State agency shall have executed an agreement with the Department 
and shall have received approval of its State Plan.
    (2) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, all funds not made 
available to the Secretary in accordance with paragraph (a)(6) of this 
section shall be distributed to State agencies on the basis of funding 
formulas which allocate funds to all State agencies for food costs and 
NSA costs incurred during the fiscal year for which the funds had been 
made available to the Department. Final State agency grant levels as 
determined by the funding formula and State agency breastfeeding 
promotion and support expenditure targets will be issued in a timely 
manner.
    (3) A State agency may transfer funds allocated to it for one fiscal 
year to another fiscal year under the following conditions:
    (i) Not more than 1 percent of the funds allocated to a State agency 
for food costs incurred in any fiscal year may be expended by the State 
agency for food costs incurred in the preceding fiscal year;
    (ii) Not more than 1 percent of the total funds allocated to a State 
agency for food costs and for NSA costs in any fiscal year may be spent 
forward and expended by the State agency for such costs incurred in the 
subsequent fiscal year, except that State agencies which converted food 
funds to NSA funds under paragraph (f) of this section during a fiscal 
year shall not spend NSA funds forward into the following fiscal year.
    (iii) The total amount of funds transferred from any fiscal year 
under paragraphs (b)(3)(i) and (b)(3)(ii) of this section shall not 
exceed 1 percent of the funds allocated to a State agency for the fiscal 
year.
    (iv) A State agency which has implemented an acceptable cost 
containment measure(s) resulting in increased annual food cost savings 
of more than 5 percent of its food grant, may spend forward into the 
fiscal year following the fiscal year of implementation a maximum of 5 
percent of the funds allocated to the State agency for food costs for 
the fiscal year of implementation of such system, less any food funds 
backspent into the prior fiscal year under paragraph (b)(3)(i) of this 
section and any food and NSA funds spent forward into the succeeding 
fiscal year under paragraph (b)(3)(ii) of this section.
    (v) Any State agency entering the second fiscal year following the 
fiscal year of implementation of, or a significant change to, any cost 
containment measure may, at its discretion, spend forward up to 3 
percent of the funds allocated to such State agency for food costs for 
such fiscal year, less any food

[[Page 313]]

funds backspent under paragraph (b)(3)(i) of this section and any food 
and NSA funds spent forward from the fiscal year under paragraph 
(b)(3)(ii) of this section.
    (vi) The State agency shall specify in writing to the Department the 
amount of funds it intends to backspend under paragraph (b)(3)(i) of 
this section and to spend forward under paragraphs (b)(3) (ii), (iv) and 
(v) of this section not later than March 1 of the fiscal year following 
the fiscal year from which funds are to be transferred.
    (vii) Food funds transferred by the State agency from one fiscal 
year to another shall be used by the State agency only for food costs in 
the subsequent fiscal year and, in accordance with Sec. 246.14(a)(2) of 
this part, shall not be used to cover NSA costs. Any funds spent forward 
by the State agency for expenditure in the subsequent fiscal year shall 
not affect the amount of funds allocated to such State agency for the 
subsequent fiscal year. The Department shall presume that any funds 
spent forward are the first funds expended by such State agency for 
costs incurred in the subsequent fiscal year.
    (4) Any State agency using an approved cost containment measure as 
defined in Sec. 246.2 of this part (rebates, competitive bidding, home 
delivery and direct distribution), may temporarily borrow amounts made 
available to the State agency for the first quarter of a fiscal year to 
defray expenses for costs incurred during the final quarter of the 
preceding fiscal year. Any State agency that uses this authority shall 
restore or reimburse such borrowed amounts when the State agency 
receives payment as a result of its cost containment measures for such 
expenses.
    (5) Each State agency's funds will be provided by means of a Letter 
of Credit unless another funding method is specified by the Department. 
State agencies shall use funds to cover those allowable and documented 
Program costs, as defined in Sec. 246.14, which are incurred by the 
State agency and participating local agencies within their 
jurisdictions.
    (c) Allocation formula. State agencies shall receive grant 
allocations according to the formulas described in this paragraph. To 
accomplish the distribution of funds under the allocation formulas, 
State agencies shall furnish the Department with any necessary financial 
and Program data.
    (1) Use of participation data in the formula. Wherever the formula 
set forth in paragraphs (c)(2) and (c)(3) of this section require the 
use of participation data, the Department shall use participation data 
reported by State agencies according to Sec. 246.25(b).
    (2) Allocation for nutrition services and administration. The funds 
available for allocation to State agencies for NSA for each fiscal year 
shall be an amount sufficient to guarantee a national average per 
participant grant, as adjusted for inflation. The amount of the national 
average per participant grant for NSA for any fiscal year will be $8.24, 
the amount of the national average per participant grant for NSA 
allocated for Fiscal Year 1987, annually adjusted for inflation. This 
inflation adjustment will be made by revising the $8.24 to reflect the 
percentage change in the value of the index for State and local 
government purchases, calculated using the implicit price deflator, as 
published by the Bureau of Economic Analysis of the Department of 
Commerce. The percentage change shall be calculated based upon the 
change between (x) the base year, and (y) the most recent estimate that 
is available as of the start of the current fiscal year of the value of 
such index for the 12-month period ending June 30 of the previous fiscal 
year. The base year is the value of such index for the 12-month period 
ending June 1986. Funds for NSA costs will be allocated according to the 
following procedure:
    (i) Allocation of stability funds. To the extent funds are 
available, and subject to the provisions of paragraph (c)(2)(iii) of 
this section, each State agency shall, at a minimum, receive an amount 
equal to the final amount of funds received for NSA in the preceding 
fiscal year.
    (ii) Allocation of residual funds. Subject to the provisions of 
paragraph (c)(2)(iii) of this section, any funds remaining available for 
allocation for

[[Page 314]]

NSA after the stability allocation required by paragraph (c)(2)(i) of 
this section has been completed shall be allocated as residual funds.
    (A) The Department shall allocate residual funds to each State 
agency according to a method that determines the higher of an amount 
equalling the stability funds which are allocated in accordance with 
paragraph (c)(2)(i) of this section plus an amount commensurate with the 
projected increase in participation from the preceding year as 
determined by the Department or the amount of funds generated by the 
formula set forth in paragraph (c)(2)(ii)(B) of this section.
    (B) The formula shall calculate the amount of funds each State 
agency would receive if all available NSA funds were allocated on the 
basis of the average monthly participation levels, as projected by the 
Department. Each State agency's projected participation level shall be 
adjusted to account for the higher (per participant) costs associated 
with small participation levels, differential salary levels relative to 
a national average salary level, and service to Priority I participants 
relative to the national average service to Priority I participants. The 
formula shall be adjusted to account for these costs factors in the 
following manner: 80 percent of available funds shall provide 
compensation based on rates which are proportionately higher for the 
first 15,000 or fewer participants, as projected by the Department, and 
20 percent of available funds shall provide compensation based on 
differential salary levels and service to Priority I participants, as 
determined by the Department.
    (iii) Discretionary funds. Each State agency's final NSA grant shall 
be reduced by 10 percent, and these funds shall be aggregated for all 
State agencies within each FCS region to form a discretionary fund. The 
Department shall distribute these funds according to guidelines which 
shall be established nationally each year and which shall consider the 
varying needs of State agencies within the region.
    (iv) Operational level. The sum of each State agency's stability, 
residual and discretionary funds shall constitute the State agency's 
operational level. This operational level shall remain unchanged for 
such year even if the number of Federally-supported participants in the 
program at such State agency is lower than the Federally-projected 
participation level. However, if the provisions of paragraph (e)(2)(ii) 
of this section are applicable, a State agency will have its operational 
level for NSA reduced in the immediately succeeding fiscal year.
    (3) Allocation of food benefit funds. In any fiscal year, any 
amounts remaining from amounts appropriated for such fiscal year and 
amounts appropriated from the preceding fiscal year after making 
allocations under paragraph (a)(6) of this section and allocations for 
nutrition services and administration (NSA) as required by paragraph 
(c)(2) of this section shall be made available for food costs. 
Allocations to State agencies for food costs will be determined 
according to the following procedure:
    (i) Fair share allocation. (A) For each State agency, establish a 
fair share allocation which shall be an amount of funds proportionate to 
the State agency's share of the national aggregate population of persons 
who are income eligible to participate in the Program based on the 185 
percent of poverty criterion. The Department will determine each State 
agency's population of persons categorically eligible for WIC which are 
at or below 185% of poverty, through the best available, nationally 
uniform, indicators as determined by the Department. If the Commodity 
Supplemental Food Program (CSFP) also operates in the area served by the 
WIC State agency, the number of participants in such area participating 
in the CSFP but otherwise eligible to participate in the WIC Program, as 
determined by FCS, shall be deducted from the WIC State agency's 
population of income eligible persons.
    (B) The Department may adjust the respective amounts of food funds 
that would be allocated to a State agency which is outside the 48 
contiguous states and the District of Columbia when the State agency can 
document that economic conditions result in higher food costs for the 
State agency. Prior to any such adjustment, the State agency must 
demonstrate that it

[[Page 315]]

has successfully implemented voluntary cost containment measures, such 
as improved vendor management practices, participation in multi-state 
agency infant formula rebate contracts or other cost containment 
efforts. The Department may use the Thrifty Food Plan amounts used in 
the Food Stamp Program, or other available data, to formulate adjustment 
factors for such State agencies.
    (ii) Stability allocation. If funds are available, each State agency 
shall receive a stability allocation equal to its final authorized grant 
level as of September 30 of the prior fiscal year plus a full inflation 
increase. The inflation factor shall reflect the anticipated rate of 
food cost increases as determined by the Department. If funds are not 
available to provide all State agencies with their full stability 
allocation, all State agencies shall receive a prorata reduction from 
their full stability allocation as required by the short fall of 
available funds.
    (iii) Growth allocation. (A) If additional funds remain available 
after the allocation of funds under (c)(3)(ii) of this section, each 
State agency which has a stability allocation, as calculated in 
paragraph (c)(3)(ii) of this section, which is less than its fair share 
allocation shall receive additional funds based on the difference 
between its stability allocation and fair share allocation. Each State 
agency's difference shall be divided by the total of the differences for 
all such State agencies, to determine the percent share of the available 
growth funds each State agency shall receive. In the event a State 
agency declines any of its allocation in paragraph (c)(3)(ii) of this 
section or this paragraph, the funds declined shall be allocated to the 
remaining State agencies which are still under their fair share.
    (B) In the event funds still remain after completing the 
distribution in paragraph (c)(3)(iii)(A) of this section, these funds 
shall be allocated to all State agencies including those with a 
stability allocation at, or greater than, their fair share allocation. 
Each State agency which can document the need for additional funds shall 
receive additional funds based on the difference between its prior year 
grant level and its fair share allocation. State agencies closest to 
their fair share allocation shall receive first consideration.
    (iv) Migrant services. At least \9/10\ of one percent of 
appropriated funds for each fiscal year shall be available first to 
assure service to eligible members of migrant populations. For those 
State agencies serving migrants, a portion of the grant shall be 
designated to each State agency for service to members of migrant 
populations based on that State agency's prior year reported migrant 
participation. The national aggregate amount made available first for 
this purpose shall equal \9/10\ of one percent of all funds appropriated 
each year for the Program.
    (v) Special provisions for Indian State agencies. The Department may 
choose to adjust the allocations and/or eligibles data among Indian 
State agencies, or among Indian State agencies and the geographic State 
agencies in which they are located when eligibles data for the State 
agencies' population is determined to not fairly represent the 
population to be served. Such allocations may be redistributed from one 
State agency to another, based on negotiated agreements among the 
affected State agencies approved by FCS.
    (4) Adjustment for new State agencies. Whenever a State agency that 
had not previously administered the program enters into an agreement 
with the Department to do so during a fiscal year, the Department shall 
make any adjustments to the requirements of this section that are deemed 
necessary to establish an appropriate initial funding level for such 
State agency.
    (d) Distribution of funds to local agencies. The State agency shall 
provide to local agencies all funds made available by the Department, 
except those funds necessary for allowable State agency NSA costs and 
food costs paid directly by the State agency. The State agency shall 
distribute the funds based on claims submitted at least monthly by the 
local agency. Where the State agency advances funds to local agencies, 
the State agency shall ensure that each local agency has funds to cover 
immediate disbursement needs, and the State agency shall offset the 
advances made against incoming claims each

[[Page 316]]

month to ensure that funding levels reflect the actual expenditures 
reported by the local agency. Upon receipt of Program funds from the 
Department, the State agency shall take the following actions:
    (1) Distribute funds to cover expected food cost expenditures and/or 
distribute caseload targets to each local agency which are used to 
project food cost expenditures.
    (2) Allocate funds to cover expected local agency NSA costs in a 
manner which takes into consideration each local agency's needs. For the 
allocation of NSA funds, the State agency shall develop an NSA funding 
procedure, in cooperation with representative local agencies, which 
takes into account the varying needs of the local agencies. The State 
agency shall consider the views of local agencies, but the final 
decision as to the funding procedure remains with the State agency. The 
State agency shall take into account factors it deems appropriate to 
further proper, efficient and effective administration of the program, 
such as local agency staffing needs, density of population, number of 
persons served, and availability of administrative support from other 
sources.
    (3) The State agency may provide in advance to any local agency any 
amount of funds for NSA deemed necessary for the successful commencement 
or significant expansion of program operations during a reasonable 
period following approval of a new local agency, a new cost containment 
measure, or a significant change in an existing cost containment 
measure.
    (e) Recovery and reallocation of funds. (1) Funds may be recovered 
from a State agency at any time the Department determines, based on 
State agency reports of expenditures and operations, that the State 
agency is not expending funds at a rate commensurate with the amount of 
funds distributed or provided for expenditures under the Program. 
Recovery of funds may be either voluntary or involuntary in nature. Such 
funds shall be reallocated by the Department through application of 
appropriate formulas set forth in paragraph (c) of this section.
    (2) Performance standards. The following standards shall govern 
expenditure performance.
    (i) The amount allocated to any State agency for food benefits in 
the current fiscal year shall be reduced if such State agency's food 
expenditures for the preceding fiscal year do not equal or exceed 96 
percent of the amount allocated to the State agency for such costs for 
fiscal year 1995 and fiscal year 1996 and 97 percent for fiscal year 
1997 and beyond. Such reduction shall equal the difference between the 
State agency's preceding year food expenditures and the performance 
expenditure standard amount. For purposes of determining the amount of 
such reduction, the amount allocated to the State agency for food 
benefits for the preceding fiscal year shall not include food funds 
expended for food costs incurred under the spendback provision in 
paragraph (b)(3)(i) of this section or conversion authority in paragraph 
(g) of this section. Temporary waivers of the performance standard may 
be granted at the discretion of the Department.
    (ii) Reduction of NSA operational level. If a State agency's per 
participant expenditure for NSA is more than 15 percent higher than its 
per participant grant for NSA without good cause, the Secretary shall 
reduce such State agency's operational level for costs of NSA in the 
next fiscal year. Circumstances that may meet the good cause criterion 
include, but are not limited to, dramatic and unforeseen increase in 
food costs, which result in the inability to reach Federally-projected 
participation levels. To avoid a reduction, the State agency must submit 
to and receive approval from the Department, justification for exceeding 
the 15 percent limit on excess NSA expenditures under the ``good cause'' 
allowance. The justification must be submitted at the time it submits 
its closeout report for the applicable fiscal year.
    (iii) Spend forward funds. If any State agency notifies the 
Department of its intent to spend forward a specific amount of funds for 
expenditure in the subsequent fiscal year, in accordance with paragraph 
(b)(3)(ii) of this section, such funds shall not be subject to recovery 
by the Department.

[[Page 317]]

    (f) Conversion of food funds. In any fiscal year that a State agency 
achieves, through use of acceptable measures (including, but not limited 
to, use of cost containment measures, curtailment of vendor abuse, and 
breastfeeding promotional activities), increased Federal participation 
that exceeds its current year Federally-projected participation level as 
determined by the allocation in the second quarter, such State agency 
may convert food funds to NSA funds. The conversion rate (per 
participant administrative grant) will be determined after the initial 
allocation (excluding partial year appropriations) by dividing the 
current year's administrative grant, inclusive of regional discretionary 
funds, by the current year's Federally-projected participation level. 
This conversion is allowable to the extent that the funds are necessary 
to cover allowable NSA expenditures in such fiscal year and the State 
agency does not exceed the per participant grant for NSA established by 
the funding procedure in paragraph (c)(2) in this section. If a State 
agency increases its participation level through measures that are not 
in the nutritional interests of participants or not otherwise allowable 
under program regulations (such as reducing the quantities of foods 
provided for reasons not related to nutritional need), the State agency 
may not convert amounts allocated for food benefits to defray costs of 
NSA and the expenditure of such funds for NSA purposes will be 
disallowed in accordance with paragraph (h) of this section.
    (g) Expenditure of converted food funds. The State agency may 
convert food funds to NSA funds under paragraph (f) of this section only 
to the extent necessary to cover allowable NSA costs which exceed the 
State agency's NSA grant for the current fiscal year and any NSA funds 
which the State agency has spent forward into the current fiscal year.
    (h) Limits on converted food funds. At the end of the fiscal year, 
the Department will determine the amount of food funds which the State 
agency was entitled to convert to NSA funds under paragraph (f) of this 
section. In the event that the State agency has converted more than the 
permitted amount of funds, the Department will disallow the amount of 
excess conversion.
    (i) Converted funds in relation to grants. For purposes of 
establishing a State agency's stability food grant and stability NSA 
grant under paragraphs (c)(2)(i) and (c)(3)(i) of this section, 
respectively, amounts converted from food funds to NSA funds under 
paragraph (f) of this section and Sec. 246.14(e) of this part during the 
preceding fiscal year shall be treated as though no conversion had taken 
place.
    (j) Cost-containment measures for WIC Program foods. No State agency 
may receive its allocation unless on or before August 30, 1989 (or a 
subsequent date established by the Secretary for any State) such State 
has: (1) Examined the feasibility of implementing cost containment 
measures with respect to procurement of infant formula, and, where 
practicable, other foods necessary to carry out the program; and (2) 
initiated action to implement such measures unless the State agency 
demonstrates, to the satisfaction of the Secretary, that such measures 
would not lower costs or would interfere with the delivery of formula or 
foods to participants in the program.
    (k) Requirements for infant formula procurement. Unless granted a 
waiver under paragraph (n) of this section, all State agencies with 
retail food delivery systems (except Indian State agencies with 1000 or 
fewer participants in April of any fiscal year, which shall be exempted 
for the following fiscal year) shall implement infant formula cost 
containment measures for each of the types and forms of infant formulas 
prescribed to the majority of participants, i.e., milk and soy-based 
iron-fortified, liquid concentrate formulas, or whatever other types and 
forms of formula routinely prescribed, through one of the following two 
methods:
    (1) Single-supplier competitive method. The single-supplier 
competitive method is a solicitation of sealed competitive bids from 
infant formula manufacturers for a competitive single-supplier system in 
which the manufacturer offering the lowest net wholesale cost per unit 
of infant formula or highest rebate per unit of infant formula is

[[Page 318]]

awarded the contract to provide all infant formula of the forms and 
types specified in the invitation for bids for the State agency's WIC 
Program (except alternate brands prescribed by a physician).
    (2) Comparative method. The comparative method is a procedure in 
which bids for two or more types of cost containment systems are 
simultaneously solicited and a contract or contracts are awarded under 
the system which will provide the greatest savings. This system shall 
include the solicitation of bids under the single-supplier competitive 
system described in paragraph (m)(1) of this section. The State agency 
may prescribe standards of its choice for the other alternative cost 
containment systems, provided that conditions established for each 
system addressed in the invitation for bids include identical bid 
specifications for the contract period length and the types and forms of 
infant formula products to be included in the systems. Additionally, the 
rate of utilization of the various types and forms of formula must be 
comparable. The State agency shall employ the following procedure in 
conducting a cost comparison to determine which system offers the 
greatest savings over the entire effective contract period specified in 
the invitation for bids.
    (i) Food cost savings--(A) Single Supplier Competitive System. The 
State agency shall project food cost savings in the single-supplier 
competitive system based on the rebate amount or net wholesale price and 
the total number of units of the specified types and forms of infant 
formula to be purchased under the Program less the number of units of 
alternative brands anticipated to be prescribed by physicians and 
purchased by participants. If the number of units of non-specalized, 
non-contract formula expected to be purchased exceeds 4 percent of the 
anticipated total number of units, the State agency shall submit 
empirical evidence in support of the percentage to FCS for review and 
approval prior to issuing the invitation for bids.
    (B) Alternative Cost Containment Systems. The State agency shall 
project food cost savings under alternative rebate systems based on the 
rebate amount or wholesale net price, the total number of units of the 
specified types and forms of the infant formula to be purchased under 
the Program less the number of units of alternative brands anticipated 
to be prescribed by physicians and purchased by participants and the 
percentage of anticipated total WIC formula purchases attributable to 
each manufacturer. The State agency must use the aggregate market share 
of the manufacturers submitting bids in calculating its cost savings 
estimate.
    (C) General. In establishing the potential food cost savings under 
each system, the State agency shall take into consideration in its 
estimate of savings any inflation factors which would affect the amount 
of savings over the life of the contract. Further, the State agency 
shall not subtract any loss of payments which would occur under the 
terms of a current contract as the result of any State agency action to 
be effective after expiration of the contract.
    (ii) Nutrition services and administration cost adjustment. The 
State agency shall deduct from food cost savings projected for each 
system under paragraph (m)(2)(i) of this section nutrition services and 
administration costs associated with developing and implementing--but 
not operating--each cost containment system, including any anticipated 
costs for modifying its automated data processing system or components 
of its food delivery system(s), and of training participants, local 
agencies, vendors, and physicians on the purpose and procedures of the 
new system. For contracts of two years or less, such costs shall be 
proportionately distributed over at least a 2 year period. The State 
agency shall not deduct any costs associated with procurement. The State 
agency shall itemize and justify all nutrition services and 
administration cost adjustments as necessary and reasonable for the 
development and implementation of each system.
    (iii) Final cost comparison. The State agency shall calculate the 
food cost savings and deduct the appropriate nutrition services and 
administration costs for each system for which bids were received. The 
State agency must

[[Page 319]]

implement the competitive single-supplier system, unless its comparative 
cost analysis shows that, over the length of the contract stipulated in 
the bid invitation, an alternative system offers savings at least equal 
to, or greater than, those under the competitive single-supplier system. 
If the comparative cost analysis permits selection of the alternative 
system and the State agency wishes to implement that system, it must 
first submit a State Plan amendment with the calculations and supporting 
documentation for this cost analysis to FCS for approval. Only after the 
calculations are approved by FCS may the State agency award the contract 
or contacts under the alternative system.
    (l) A State agency which, after completing the cost comparison in 
paragraph (m)(2)(iii) of this section, is required to implement the 
competitive single-supplier system for infant formula procurement, may 
request a waiver to permit it to implement an alternative system. State 
agencies shall support all waiver requests with documentation in the 
form of a State Plan amendment as required under Sec. 246.4(a)(14)(x) of 
this part and may submit such requests only in either of the following 
circumstances:
    (1) The difference between the competitive single-supplier system 
and the system preferred by the State agency is less than 3 percent of 
the savings anticipated under the latter system and not more than 
$100,000 per annum.
    (2) The competitive single-supplier system would be inconsistent 
with efficient or effective operation of the program. Examples of 
justifications FCS will not accept for a waiver, include, but are not 
limited to: Preservation of participant preference for otherwise 
nutritionally equivalent infant formulas; maintenance of health care 
professionals' prerogatives to prescribe otherwise nutritionally 
equivalent infant formulas for non-medical reasons; potential loss of 
free or otherwise discounted materials to WIC clinics and other health 
care facilities; potential inability of a manufacturer selected in 
accordance with applicable State procurement procedures to supply 
contractually-specified amounts of infant formula; and the possibility 
of interrupted infant formula supplies to retail outlets as a 
consequence of entering into a contract with a single manufacturer.
    (m) Implementation time frames. All state agencies except those with 
an FCS approval feasibility study demonstrating the infeasibility of 
implementing a cost containment system shall continuously operate such a 
system, in accordance with the following time frames:
    (1) Any State agency without an infant formula cost containment 
system in effect as of March 15, 1990 shall fully implement a system not 
later than November 10, 1990.
    (2) A State agency operating a retail food delivery system which has 
a cost containment contract for infant formula in effect on November 10, 
1989 shall enter into a contract or contracts in compliance with 
paragraph (m) of this section to be effective not later than the 
expiration date of the last of its current contracts. A State agency 
with more than one contract in effect as of November 10, 1989 may extend 
all contracts to the expiration date of the last of those contracts; 
however, the State agency may not renew, extend, or otherwise continue 
such contracts after that date, except in the following circumstances:
    (i) The State agency's contract expires before June 13, 1990. Such 
State agencies will be granted a 120-day extension for implementing an 
infant formula cost containment system which complies with paragraph (m) 
of this section upon written request to FCS.
    (ii) The State agency has obtained a postponement of implementation 
under paragraph (o)(5) of this section.
    (3) When a State agency finds that it is practicable and feasible to 
implement a cost containment system for any WIC food other than infant 
formula, the State agency shall fully implement that system in 
accordance with time frames established by the State agency and 
notification must be given to FCS by means of the State agency's State 
Plan.
    (4) If an Indian State agency operating a retail food delivery 
system expands its Program participation above 1000 and thereby loses 
its exemption

[[Page 320]]

from the requirements of Sec. 246.16(m) regarding the method of cost 
containment for infant formula, that Indian State agency shall begin 
compliance with Sec. 246.16(m) in accordance with times frames 
established by FCS on a case-by-case basis.
    (5) A State agency may request a postponement of the deadlines 
established in this paragraph when the State agency has taken timely and 
responsible action to implement a cost containment system within the 
deadlines but has been unable to do so due to procurement delays, 
disputes with FCS concerning cost containment issues during the State 
Plan approval process, or other circumstances beyond its control. Such 
request shall be submitted prior to the earlier of the expiration of its 
current system or the deadline established under this paragraph. The 
postponement period shall be no longer than 120 days. If a postponement 
is granted, the State agency may extend, renew or otherwise continue an 
existing system during the period of the postponement.
    (n) Penalty for noncompliance. Any State agency which FCS determines 
to be in noncompliance with the cost containment requirements of this 
part shall not draw down on or obligate any Program grant funds, nor 
will FCS make any further Program funds available to such State agency, 
until such State agency complies with these requirements.
    (o) Cost Containment Contract provisions. State agencies shall not 
issue invitations for bids or enter into contracts which:
    (1) Prescribe conditions that would void, reduce the savings under 
or otherwise limit the original contract if the State agency solicited 
or secured bids for, or entered into, a subsequent cost containment 
contract to take effect after the expiration of the original contract;
    (2) Exclude from consideration in the bidding evaluation any infant 
formula manufacturer in compliance with the Federal Food, Drug and 
Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 321 et seq.); or
    (3) Require infant formula manufacturers to submit bids on more than 
one of the systems specified in the invitation for bids.
    (p) National Cost Containment Bid Solicitation and Selection. FCS 
shall solicit and select bids for infant formula rebates on behalf of 
State agencies with retail food delivery systems based on the following 
guidelines:
    (1) FCS shall solicit bids and select the winning bidder(s) for 
infant formula cost containment contracts only if 2 or more State 
agencies with retail food delivery systems request FCS to conduct bid 
solicitation and selection on their behalf. FCS shall conduct the bid 
solicitation and selection process only and shall not award or enter 
into any infant formula cost containment contract on behalf of the 
individual State agencies. Each State agency will individually award and 
enter into infant formula cost containment contract(s) with the winning 
bidder(s). State agencies shall obtain the rebates directly from the 
infant formula manufacturer(s). FCS shall conduct the bid solicitation 
in accordance with this paragraph and the competitive bidding 
procurement procedures of the State agency with the highest infant 
participation in the bid group on whose behalf bids are being solicited. 
Any bid protests and contractual disputes are the responsibility of the 
State agencies individually.
    (2) FCS shall make a written offer to all State agencies to conduct 
bid solicitation and selection on their behalf at least once every 12 
months. FCS shall send State agencies a copy of the draft Request for 
Rebates when making the offer to State agencies. Only State agencies 
that provide the information required by this subparagraph in writing, 
signed by a responsible State agency official, by certified mail, return 
receipt requested or by hand delivery with evidence of receipt within 15 
days of receipt of the offer will be included in the national bid 
solicitation and selection process. Each interested State agency must 
provide:
    (i) A statement that the State agency requests FCS to conduct bid 
solicitation and selection on its behalf;
    (ii) A statement of the State agency's minimum procurement 
procedures applicable to competitive bidding (as defined in Sec. 246.2) 
for infant formula cost containment contracts and supporting 
documentation;

[[Page 321]]

    (iii) A statement of any limitation on the duration of infant 
formula cost containment contracts and supporting documentation;
    (iv) A statement of any contractual provisions required to be 
included in infant formula cost containment contracts by the State 
agency;
    (v) An infant participation estimate for the term to be covered by 
the infant formula cost containment contract and supporting 
documentation;
    (vi) Infant formula usage rates by type (i.e. milk-based or soy-
based), form (e.g., concentrated, ready-to-feed, etc.), and container 
size and supporting documentation;
    (vii) A statement of the termination date of the State agency's 
current infant formula cost containment contract; and
    (viii) Any other related information that FCS may request.
    (3) If FCS determines that the number of State agencies making the 
request provided for in paragraph (p)(2) of this section so warrants, 
FCS may, in consultation with such State agencies, divide such State 
agencies into more than one group and solicit bids for each group. These 
groups of State agencies are referred to as ``bid groups'' in this rule. 
In determining the size and composition of the bid groups, FCS shall, to 
the extent practicable, take into account the need to maximize the 
number of potential bidders so as to increase competition among infant 
formula manufacturers and the similarities in the State agencies' 
procurement and contract requirements (as provided by the State agencies 
in accordance with paragraphs (p)(2) (ii), (iii), and (iv) of this 
section). FCS reserves the right to exclude a State agency from the 
national bid solicitation and selection process if FCS determines that 
the State agency's procurement requirements or contractual requirements 
are so dissimilar from those of the other State agencies in any bid 
group that the State agency's inclusion in the bid group could adversely 
affect the bids.
    (4) For each bid group formed pursuant to paragraphs (p)(2) and (3) 
of this section, FCS shall choose the competitive bidding procurement 
procedures of the State agency in the group with the highest infant 
participation to be used in soliciting the bids for that bid group. To 
the extent not inconsistent with the requirements of this paragraph, FCS 
shall use that set of procedures in soliciting the bids for that bid 
group of State agencies. FCS shall notify each State agency in the bid 
group of the choice and provide them each a copy of the procurement 
procedures of the chosen State agency. Each State agency shall provide 
FCS a written statement, signed by a responsible State agency official, 
by certified mail, return receipt requested or by hand delivery with 
evidence of receipt stating whether that State agency is legally 
authorized to award an infant formula cost containment contract pursuant 
to that set of procedures within 10 days of the receipt of the 
notification. If the State agency determines it is not legally 
authorized to award an infant formula cost containment contract pursuant 
to those procedures, that State agency may not continue in that round of 
the national bid solicitation and selection.
    (5) At a minimum, in soliciting bids FCS shall address the 
following:
    (i) Unless FCS determines that doing so would not be in the best 
interest of the Program, bids shall be solicited from infant formula 
manufacturers both for milk-based and soy-based infant formula 
separately.
    (ii) Infant formula cost containment contracts to be entered into by 
the State agencies and infant formula manufacturers must provide for a 
constant net price for infant formula for the full term of the infant 
formula cost containment contracts and provide rebates for all units of 
infant formula sold through the Program that are produced by the 
manufacturer awarded the infant formula cost containment contract. The 
infant formula cost containment contracts shall cover all types and 
forms of infant formula products normally provided to the majority of 
participants by the State agencies, with the exception of infant 
formulas for participants with special dietary needs.
    (iii) The duration of the infant formula cost containment contracts 
for each bid group shall be determined by FCS in consultation with the 
State

[[Page 322]]

agencies. The term shall be for a period of not less than 2 years, 
unless the law applicable to a State agency regarding the duration of 
infant formula cost containment contracts is more restrictive than this 
paragraph. In such cases, the term of the contract for only that State 
agency shall be for one year, with the option provided to the State 
agency to extend the contract for a specified number of additional years 
(to be determined by FCS in consultation with the State agency). The 
date on which the individual State agencies' current infant formula cost 
containment contracts terminate may vary, so the infant formula cost 
containment contracts awarded by the State agencies within a bid group 
may begin on different dates.
    (iv) FCS shall not prescribe conditions that are prohibited under 
paragraph (q)(1) of this section.
    (v) FCS shall solicit bids for rebates only from infant formula 
manufacturers. FCS may limit advertising to contacting in writing each 
infant formula manufacturer which has registered with the Secretary of 
Health and Human Services under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act 
(21 U.S.C. 321 et seq.).
    (6) FCS shall select the winning bidder(s). The winning bidder(s) 
shall be the responsive and responsible bidder(s) meeting the 
specifications and all bid terms and conditions which offers the lowest 
net price weighted to take into account infant formula usage rates and 
infant participation. In all instances the winning bidder(s) will be 
those which singly or in combination yield the greatest aggregate 
savings based on the net price weighted to take into account the infant 
formula usage rates. To break a tie between 2 equally low bids, FCS 
shall select the bidder to be awarded the infant formula cost 
containment contract by a drawing by lot limited to the bidders which 
submitted those bids.
    (7) Once FCS has conducted bid selection, a State agency may decline 
to award the infant formula cost containment contract(s) only if the 
State agency determines that to award the contract(s) would not be in 
the best interests of its Program, taking into account whether the 
national bid solicitation and selection would achieve a lower aggregate 
savings.
    (8) As soon as practicable after selecting the winning bid(s), FCS 
will notify the affected State agencies in writing of the bid results, 
including the name(s) of the winning bidder(s). If a State agency 
chooses to request approval to decline to award the infant formula cost 
containment contract(s) in accordance with paragraph (p)(7) of this 
section, it must notify FCS in writing, signed by a responsible State 
agency official, together with supporting documentation, by certified 
mail, return receipt requested or by hand delivery with evidence of 
receipt within 10 days of the State agency's receipt of this 
notification of bid results.
    (9) If FCS approves any State agency's request to decline to award 
the infant formula cost containment contract(s) in accordance with 
paragraphs (p) (7) and (8) of this section, FCS shall notify the bidders 
of the decision. If two or more State agencies remain in the group, FCS 
shall require the bidders to indicate in writing whether they wish to 
withdraw or modify their bids within 5 days of receipt of this 
notification. After receiving this information, FCS shall again permit 
State agencies to decline to award the infant formula cost containment 
contract(s) in accordance with paragraphs (p) (7) and (8) of this 
section. If FCS approves these additional State agency requests to 
decline, FCS may conduct a resolicitation of bids in accordance with 
this paragraph.

[50 FR 6121, Feb. 13, 1985, as amended at 52 FR 21237, June 4, 1987; 52 
FR 25190, July 2, 1987; 53 FR 2221, Jan. 27, 1988; 53 FR 25315, July 6, 
1988; 54 FR 18091, Apr. 27, 1989, 54 FR 19486, May 5, 1989; 55 FR 9717, 
Mar. 15, 1990; 55 FR 11109, Mar. 26, 1990; 58 FR 47022, Sept. 7, 1993; 
58 FR 51568, Oct. 4, 1993; 59 FR 11504, Mar. 11, 1994; 59 FR 50823, Oct. 
6, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 246.17  Closeout procedures.

    (a) General. State agencies shall submit preliminary and final 
closeout reports for each fiscal year. All obligations shall be 
liquidated before closure of a fiscal year grant. Obligations shall be 
reported for the fiscal year in which they occur.
    (b) Fiscal year closeout reports. State agencies--

[[Page 323]]

    (1) Shall submit to FCS, within 30 days after the end of the fiscal 
year, preliminary financial reports which show cumulative actual 
expenditures and obligations for the fiscal year, or part thereof, for 
which Program funds were made available;
    (2) Shall submit to FCS, within 150 days after the end of the fiscal 
year, final fiscal year closeout reports;
    (3) May submit revised closeout reports. FCS will reimburse State 
agencies for additional costs claimed in a revised closeout report up to 
the State's original grant level, if costs are properly justified and if 
funds are available for the fiscal year pertaining to the request. FCS 
will not be responsible for reimbursing State agencies for unreported 
expenditures later than one year after the end of the fiscal year in 
which they were incurred.
    (c) Grant closeout procedures. When grants to State agencies are 
terminated, the following procedures shall be performed in accordance 
with 7 CFR part 3016.
    (1) FCS may disqualify a State agency's participation under the 
Program, in whole or in part, or take such remedies as may be legal and 
appropriate, whenever FCS determines that the State agency failed to 
comply with the conditions prescribed in this part, in its Federal-State 
Agreement, or in FCS guidelines and instructions. FCS will promptly 
notify the State agency in writing of the disqualification together with 
the effective date. A State agency shall disqualify a local agency by 
written notice whenever it is determined by FCS or the State agency that 
the local agency has failed to comply with the requirements of the 
Program.
    (2) FCS or the State agency may disqualify the State agency or 
restrict its participation in the Program when both parties agree that 
continuation under the Program would not produce beneficial results 
commensurate with the further expenditure of funds. The State agency or 
the local agency may disqualify the local agency or restrict its 
participation in the Program under the same conditions. The two parties 
shall agree upon the conditions of disqualification, including the 
effective date thereof, and, in the case of partial disqualification, 
the portion to be disqualified.
    (3) Upon termination of a grant, the affected agency shall not incur 
new obligations for the disqualified portion after the effective date, 
and shall cancel as many outstanding obligations as possible. FCS will 
allow full credit to the State agency for the Federal share of the 
noncancellable obligations properly incurred by the State agency prior 
to disqualification, and the State agency shall do the same for the 
local agency.
    (4) A grant closeout shall not affect the retention period for, or 
Federal rights of access to, grant records as specified in Sec. 246.25. 
The closeout of a grant does not affect the State or local agency's 
responsibilities regarding property or with respect to any Program 
income for which the State or local agency is still accountable.
    (5) A final audit is not a required part of the grant closeout and 
should not be needed unless there are problems with the grant that 
require attention. If FCS considers a final audit to be necessary, it 
shall so inform OIG. OIG will be resonsible for ensuring that necessary 
final audits are performed and for any necessary coordination with other 
Federal cognizant audit agencies or the State or local auditors. Audits 
performed in accordance with Sec. 246.20 may serve as final audits 
providing such audits meet the needs of requesting agencies. If the 
grant is closed out without the audit, FCS reserves the right to 
disallow and recover an appropriate amount after fully considering any 
recommended disallowances resulting from an audit which may be conducted 
later.


<R05>
Sec. 246.18  Administrative appeal of State agency decisions.

    (a) Requirements. The State agency shall provide a hearing procedure 
whereby a food vendor or local agency adversely affected by a State or 
local agency action may appeal the action.
    (1) The right of appeal shall be granted when a local agency's or a 
food vendor's application to participate is denied or, during the course 
of the contract or agreement, when a local agency or vendor is 
disqualified or any

[[Page 324]]

other adverse action which affects participation is taken. Expiration of 
a contract or agreement with a food vendor or local agency shall not be 
subject to appeal.
    (2) The adverse action affecting a participating local agency shall 
be postponed until a hearing decision is reached.
    (3) The State agency may take adverse action against a vendor after 
the 15-day advance notification period mandated by paragraph (b)(1) of 
this section has elapsed. In deciding whether or not to postpone adverse 
action until a hearing decision is rendered, the State agency shall 
consider whether participants would be unduly inconvenienced and may 
consider other relevant criteria, determined by the State agency.
    (b) Procedure. The State agency hearing procedure shall at a minimum 
provide the local agency or vendor with the following:
    (1) Written notification of the adverse action, the cause(s) for and 
the effective date of the action. Such notification shall be provided to 
participating food vendors not less than 15 days in advance of the 
effective date of the action. In the case of the disqualification of 
local agencies, the State agency shall provide not less than 60 days 
advance notice of pending action.
    (2) The opportunity to appeal the adverse action within a time 
period specified by the State agency in its notification of adverse 
action.
    (3) Adequate advance notice of the time and place of the hearing to 
provide all parties involved sufficient time to prepare for the hearing.
    (4) The opportunity to present its case and at least one opportunity 
to reschedule the hearing date upon specific request. The State agency 
may set standards on how many hearing dates can be scheduled, provided 
that a minimum of two hearing dates is allowed.
    (5) The opportunity to confront and cross-examine adverse witnesses.
    (6) The opportunity to be represented by counsel, if desired.
    (7) The opportunity to review the case record prior to the hearing.
    (8) An impartial decision maker, whose decision as to the validity 
of the State or local agency's action shall rest solely on the evidence 
presented at the hearing and the statutory and regulatory provisions 
governing the Program. The basis for the decision shall be stated in 
writing, although it need not amount to a full opinion or contain formal 
findings of fact and conclusions of law.
    (9) Written notification of the decision concerning the appeal, 
within 60 days from the date of receipt of the request for a hearing by 
the State agency.
    (c) Continuing responsibilities. Appealing an action does not 
relieve a local agency, or a food vendor permitted to continue in the 
Program while its appeal is in process, from the responsibility of 
continued compliance with the terms of any written agreement or contract 
with the State or local agency.
    (d) Judicial review. If a State level decision is rendered against 
the local agency or food vendor and the appellant expresses an interest 
in pursuing a higher review of the decision, the State agency shall 
explain any further State level review of the decision and any available 
State level rehearing process. If neither is available or both have been 
exhausted, the State agency shall explain the right to pursue judicial 
review of the decision.


<R04>
                    Subpart F--Monitoring and Review


<R05>
Sec. 246.19  Management evaluation and reviews.

    (a) Management evaluations and reviews. (1) FCS and each State 
agency shall establish a management evaluation system in order to assess 
the accomplishment of Program objectives as provided under this part, 
FCS guidelines, instructions, and the Federal-State agreement with the 
Department. FCS will provide assistance to States in discharging this 
responsibility, establish standards and procedures to determine how well 
the objectives of this part are being accomplished, and implement 
sanction procedures as warranted by State Program performance.
    (2) If FCS determines through a management evaluation or other means 
that the State agency has failed, without good cause, to demonstrate 
efficient and effective administration of its Program or has failed to 
comply

[[Page 325]]

with the requirements contained in this part or the State Plan, FCS may 
withhold an amount up to 100 percent of the State agency's nutrition 
services and administration funds.
    (3) Sanctions imposed upon a State agency by FCS in accordance with 
this section (but not claims for repayment assessed against a State 
agency) may be appealed in accordance with the procedures established in 
Sec. 246.22. Before carrying out any sanction against a State agency, 
the following procedures will be followed:
    (i) FCS will notify the Chief State Health Officer or equivalent in 
writing of the deficiencies found and of FCS' intention to withhold 
nutrition services and administration funds unless an acceptable 
corrective action plan is submitted by the State agency to FCS within 60 
days after mailing of notification.
    (ii) The State agency shall develop a corrective action plan with a 
schedule according to which the State agency shall accomplish various 
actions to correct the deficiencies and prevent their future recurrence.
    (iii) If the corrective action plan is acceptable, FCS will notify 
the Chief State Health Officer or equivalent in writing within 30 days 
of receipt of the plan. The letter approving the corrective action plan 
will describe the technical assistance that is available to the State 
agency to correct the deficiencies. The letter will also advise the 
Chief State Health Officer or equivalent of the sanctions to be imposed 
if the corrective action plan is not implemented according to the 
schedule set forth in the approved plan.
    (iv) Upon notification from the State agency that corrective action 
as been taken, FCS will assess such action, and, if necessary, will 
perform a follow-up review to determine if the noted deficiencies have 
been corrected. FCS will then advise the State agency of whether the 
actions taken are in compliance with the corrective action plan, and 
whether the deficiency is resolved or further corrective action is 
needed.
    (v) If an acceptable corrective action plan is not submitted within 
60 days, or if corrective action is not completed according to the 
schedule established in the corrective action plan, FCS may withhold 
nutrition services and administration funds through a reduction of the 
State agency Letter of Credit or by assessing a claim against the State 
agency. FCS will notify the Chief State Health Officer or equivalent of 
this action.
    (vi) If compliance is achieved before the end of the fiscal year in 
which the nutrition services and administration funds are withheld, the 
funds withheld shall be restored to the State agency's Letter of Credit. 
FCS is not required to restore funds withheld if compliance is not 
achieved until the subsequent fiscal year. If the 60-day warning period 
ends in the fourth quarter of a fiscal year, FCS may elect not to 
withhold funds until the next fiscal year.
    (b) State agency responsibilities. (1) The State agency shall 
establish an on-going management evaluation system which includes at 
least the monitoring of local agency operations, the review of local 
agency financial and participation reports, the development of 
corrective action plans to resolve Program deficiencies, the monitoring 
of the implementation of corrective action plans, and on-site visits. 
The results of such actions shall be documented.
    (2) Monitoring of local agencies shall encompass, but not be limited 
to, evaluation of management, certification, nutrition education, civil 
rights compliance, accountability, financial management systems, and 
food delivery systems. In accordance with Sec. 246.12(i), the State 
agency shall ensure that State or local agency personnel conduct the 
necessary on-site monitoring of high risk and representative vendors. If 
the State agency delegates vendor monitoring to local agencies, it shall 
evaluate the effectiveness of these monitoring visits.
    (3) The State agency shall conduct monitoring reviews of each local 
agency at least once every two years. Such reviews shall include on-site 
reviews of a minimum of 20 percent of the clinics in each local agency 
or one clinic, whichever is greater. The State agency may conduct such 
additional on-site reviews as the State agency determines to be 
necessary in the interest of the efficiency and effectiveness of the 
program.

[[Page 326]]

    (4) The State agency shall develop a corrective action process which 
includes: prompt notification of deficiencies to the local agency, 
timely development of corrective action plans, and monitoring of local 
agency implementation of such plans.
    (5) When required by FCS, the State agency shall provide special 
reports on Program activities and act to correct deficiences in Program 
operations.
    (6) The State agency shall require local agencies to establish 
management evaluation systems to review their operations and those of 
associated clinics or contractors.

[50 FR 6121, Feb. 13, 1985, as amended at 59 FR 11508, Mar. 11, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 246.20  Audits.

    (a) Federal audit responsibilities. (1) OIG reserves the right to 
perform audits of State and local agencies and other organizations 
involved in the Program as determined by OIG to be necessary. In 
performing such audits, OIG will rely to the extent feasible on audit 
work performed by other Federal and non-Federal auditors.
    (2) The State agency may take exception to particular audit findings 
and recommendations. The State agency shall submit a response or 
statement to FCS as to the action taken or a proposed corrective action 
plan regarding the findings. A proposed corrective action plan developed 
and submitted by the State agency shall include specific timeframes for 
its implementation and for completion of correction of deficiencies and 
their causes.
    (3) FCS will determine whether Program deficiencies have been 
adequately corrected. If additional corrective action is necessary, FCS 
shall schedule a follow-up review, allowing a reasonable time for such 
corrective action to be taken.
    (b) State audit responsibilities. (1) State agencies shall comply 
with the provisions of 7 CFR part 3016 regarding independent 
organization-wide audits of financial operations. In conformance with 7 
CFR part 3016, State agencies shall arrange for independent audits of 
financial operations, including compliance with appropriate provisions 
of Federal laws and regulations, and shall ensure that audits are made 
on an organization-wide basis rather than on a program basis. When 
organization-wide audits are done the State agency shall cause 
procedures to be established which ensure that FCS programs are included 
in the universe of Federal awards from which a sample is drawn.
    (2) Such organization-wide audits shall be used to determine 
whether--
    (i) Financial operations are conducted properly;
    (ii) Financial statements are presented fairly;
    (iii) State and local agencies are complying with the laws, 
regulations and administrative requirements that affect the expenditure 
of Federal funds;
    (iv) State and local agencies have established internal procedures 
to meet the financial management objectives of federally assisted 
programs; and
    (v) State and local agencies are providing accurate and reliable 
information to the Federal government. If such agencies fail to arrange 
for the required audits at the appropriate frequency or fail to ensure 
that an acceptable audit is performed at the appropriate frequency, the 
respective cognizant audit agencies may arrange for the performance of 
the required audits. If the cognizant audit agencies arrange for the 
required audits because of these circumstances, the State agencies shall 
reimburse the respective cognizant audit agencies for the pro rata cost 
of their organization-wide audits.
    (3) Each State agency shall make all State or local agency sponsored 
audit reports of Program operations under its jurisdiction available for 
the Department's review upon request. The cost of these audits shall be 
considered a part of nutrition services and administration costs and may 
be funded from the State or local agency nutrition services and 
administration funds, as appropriate. For purposes of determining the 
Program's pro rata share of indirect costs associated with organization-
wide audits, the cost of food shall not be considered in the total 
dollar amount of the Program.


<R05>
Sec. 246.21  Investigations.

    (a) Authority. The Department may make an investigation of any 
allegation of noncompliance with this part and FCS guidelines and 
instructions.

[[Page 327]]

The investigation may include, where appropriate, a review of pertinent 
practices and policies of any State or local agency, the circumstances 
under which the possible noncompliance with this part occurred, and 
other factors relevant to a determination as to whether the State or 
local agency has failed to comply with the requirements of this part.
    (b) Confidentiality. No State or local agency, participant, or other 
person shall intimidate, threaten, coerce, or discriminate against any 
individual for the purpose of interfering with any right or privilege 
under this part because that person has made a complaint or formal 
allegation, or has testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in 
an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under this part. The identity 
of every complainant shall be kept confidential except to the extent 
necessary to carry out the purposes of this part, including the 
conducting of any investigation, hearing, or judicial proceeding.


<R04>
                   Subpart G--Miscellaneous Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 246.22  Administrative appeal of FCS decisions.

    (a) Right to appeal. When FCS asserts a sanction against a State 
agency under the provisions of Sec. 246.19, the State agency may appeal 
and must be afforded a hearing or review by an FCS Administrative Review 
Officer. The right of appeal shall not apply to claims for repayment 
assessed by FCS against the State agency under Sec. 246.23(a). A State 
agency shall have the option of requesting a hearing to present its 
position or a review of pertinent documents and records including any 
additional written submission prepared by the State agency.
    (1) FCS will send a written notice by Certified Mail-Return Receipt 
Requested to the state agency or otherwise ensure receipt of such notice 
by the agency when asserting a sanction against a State agency as 
specified in Sec. 246.19(a).
    (2) A State agency aggrieved by a sanction asserted against it may 
file a written request with the Director, Administrative Review 
Division, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Consumer Service, 
3101 Park Center Drive, Alexandria, Va. 22302, for a hearing or a review 
of the record. Such request shall be sent by Certified Mail-Return 
Receipt Requested and postmarked within 30 days of the date of receipt 
of the sanction notice. The envelope containing the request shall be 
prominently marked ``REQUEST FOR REVIEW OR HEARING.'' The request shall 
clearly identify the specific FCS sanction(s) being appealed and shall 
include a photocopy of the FCS notice of sanction. If the State agency 
does not request a review of hearing within 30 days of receipt of the 
notice, the administrative decision on the sanctions will be considered 
final.
    (b) Acknowledgment of request. Within 15 days of receipt by the 
Director of the Administrative Review Division of a request for review 
or hearing, the Director will provide the State agency with a written 
acknowledgment of the request.
    (1) The acknowledgment will include the name and address of the FCS 
Administrative Review Officer to review the sanction;
    (2) The acknowledgment will also notify the State agency that within 
30 days of the receipt of the acknowledgment, the State agency shall 
submit three sets of the following information to the Administrative 
Review Officer--
    (i) A clear, concise identification of the issue(s) in dispute;
    (ii) The State agency's position with respect to the issue(s) in 
dispute;
    (iii) The pertinent facts and reasons in support of the State 
agency's position with respect to the issue(s) in dispute and a copy of 
the specific sanction notice provided by FCS;
    (iv) All pertinent documents, correspondence and records which the 
State agency believes are relevant and helpful toward a more thorough 
understanding of the issue(s) in dispute;
    (v) The relief sought by the State agency;
    (vi) The identity of the person(s) presenting the State agency's 
position when a hearing is involved; and
    (vii) A list of prospective State agency witnesses when a hearing is 
involved.

[[Page 328]]

    (c) FCS action. (1) When a hearing is requested pursuant to this 
section, the Administrative Review Officer will, within 60 days after 
receipt of the State agency's information, schedule and conduct the 
hearing. The State agency will be advised of the time, date and location 
of the hearing at least 10 days in advance.
    (2) When a hearing is requested, the FCS Administrative Review 
Officer will make a final determination within 30 days after the 
hearing, and the final determination will take effect upon delivery of 
the written notice of this final decision to the State agency.
    (3) When a review is requested, the FCS Administrative Review 
Officer will review information presented by a State agency and will 
make a final determination within 30 days after receipt of that 
information. The final determination will take effect upon delivery of 
the written notice of this final decision to the State agency.


<R05>
Sec. 246.23  Claims and penalties.

    (a) Claims against State agencies. (1) If FCS determines through a 
review of the State agency's reports, program or financial analysis, 
monitoring, audit, or otherwise, that any Program funds provided to a 
State agency for supplemental foods or nutrition services and 
administration purposes were, through State or local agency negligence 
or fraud, misused or otherwise diverted from Program purposes, a formal 
claim will be assessed by FCS against the State agency. The State agency 
shall pay promptly to FCS a sum equal to the amount of the nutrition 
services and administration funds or the value of supplemental foods or 
food instruments so misused or diverted.
    (2) If FCS determines that any part of the Program funds received by 
a State agency; or supplemental foods, either purchased or donated 
commodities; or food instruments, were lost as a result of thefts, 
embezzlements, or unexplained causes, the State agency shall, on demand 
by FCS, pay to FCS a sum equal to the amount of the money or the value 
of the supplemental foods or food instruments so lost.
    (3) The State agency shall have full opportunity to submit evidence, 
explanation or information concerning alleged instances of noncompliance 
or diversion before a final determination is made in such cases.
    (4) FCS is authorized to establish claims against a State agency for 
unreconciled food instruments. When a State agency can demonstrate that 
all reasonable management efforts have been devoted to reconciliation 
and 99 percent or more of the food instruments issued have been 
accounted for by the reconciliation process, FCS may determine that the 
reconciliation process has been completed to satisfaction.
    (b) Interest charge on claims against State agencies. If an 
agreement cannot be reached with the State agency for payment of its 
debts or for offset of debts on its current Letter of Credit within 30 
days from the date of the first demand letter from FCS, FCS will assess 
an interest (late) charge against the State agency. Interest accrual 
shall begin on the 31st day after the date of the first demand letter, 
bill or claim, and shall be computed monthly on any unpaid balance as 
long as the debt exists. From a source other than the Program, the State 
agency shall provide the funds necessary to maintain Program operations 
at the grant level authorized by FCS.
    (c) Claims against participants. If a State agency determines that 
food benefits have been improperly issued under the Program as the 
result of a participant, guardian, or caretaker intentionally making a 
false or misleading statement or intentionally misrepresenting, 
concealing, or withholding facts, the State agency shall recover, in 
cash, from such participant, guardian, or caretaker an amount that the 
State agency determines is equal to the value of the overissued food 
benefits, unless the State agency determines that the recovery of the 
benefits would not be cost-effective. The State agency shall establish 
standards, based on a cost benefit review, for determining when recovery 
is cost-effective and maintain on file documentation of the disposition 
of all cases of improperly issued benefits. All such cases shall be 
pursued to the fullest extent possible, consistent with the State 
agency's cost-effectiveness standards. The State

[[Page 329]]

agency may delegate to its local agencies the responsibility for the 
collection of such claims in accordance with the State agency's 
standards.
    (d) Penalties. In accordance with section 12(g) of the National 
School Lunch Act, whoever embezzles, willfully misapplies, steals or 
obtains by fraud any funds, assets or property provided under section 17 
of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966, as amended, whether received 
directly or indirectly from USDA, or whoever receives, conceals or 
retains such funds, assets or property for his or her own interest, 
knowing such funds, assets or property have been embezzled, willfully 
misapplied, stolen, or obtained by fraud shall, if such funds, assets or 
property are of the value of $100 or more, be fined not more than 
$10,000 or imprisoned not more than five years, or both, or if such 
funds, assets or property are of a value of less than $100, shall be 
fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned for not more than one year, or 
both.

[50 FR 6121, Feb. 13, 1985, as amended at 52 FR 21238, June 4, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 246.24  Procurement and property management.

    (a) Requirements. State and local agencies shall ensure that 
subgrantees comply with the requirements of 7 CFR part 3016, the 
nonprocurement debarment/suspension requirements of 7 CFR part 3017, and 
if applicable, the lobbying restrictions as required in 7 CFR part 3018 
concerning the procurement and allowability of food in bulk lots, 
supplies, equipment and other services with Program funds. These 
requirements are adopted to ensure that such materials and services are 
obtained for the Program in an effective manner and in compliance with 
the provisions of applicable law and executive orders.
    (b) Contractual responsibilities. The standards contained in A-130 
and 7 CFR part 3016 do not relieve the State or local agency of the 
responsibilities arising under its contracts. The State agency is the 
responsible authority, without recourse to FCS, regarding the settlement 
and satisfaction of all contractual and administrative issues arising 
out of procurements entered into in connection with the Program. This 
includes, but is not limited to, disputes, claims, protests of award, 
source evaluation, or other matters of a contractual nature. Matters 
concerning violation of law are to be referred to such local, State or 
Federal authority as may have proper jurisdiction.
    (c) State regulations. The State or local agency may use its own 
procurement regulations which reflect applicable State and local 
regulations, provided that procurements made with Program funds adhere 
to the standards set forth in A-130 and 7 CFR part 3016.
    (d) Property acquired with Program funds. State and local agencies 
shall observe the standards prescribed in 7 CFR part 3016 in their 
utilization and disposition of real property and equipment, including 
automated data processing equipment, acquired in whole or in part with 
Program funds.

[50 FR 6121, Feb. 13, 1985, as amended at 59 FR 11508, Mar. 11, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 246.25  Records and reports.

    (a) Recordkeeping requirements. Each State and local agency shall 
maintain full and complete records concerning Program operations. Such 
records shall comply with 7 CFR part 3016 and the following 
requirements:
    (1) Records shall include, but not be limited to, information 
pertaining to financial operations, food delivery systems, food 
instrument issuance and redemption, equipment purchases and inventory, 
certification, nutrition education, civil rights and fair hearing 
procedures.
    (2) All records shall be retained for a minimum of three years 
following the date of submission of the final expenditure report for the 
period to which the report pertains. If any litigation, claim, 
negotiation, audit or other action involving the records has been 
started before the end of the three-year period, the records shall be 
kept until all issues are resolved, or until the end of the regular 
three-year period, whichever is later. If FCS deems any of the Program 
records to be of historical interest, it may require the State or local 
agency to forward such records to FCS whenever either agency is 
disposing of them.
    (3) Records for nonexpendable property acquired in whole or in part 
with

[[Page 330]]

Program funds shall be retained for three years after its final 
disposition.
    (4) All records, except medical case records of individual 
participants (unless they are the only source of certification data), 
shall be available during normal business hours for representatives of 
the Department of the Comptroller General of the United States to 
inspect, audit, and copy. Any reports resulting from such examinations 
shall not divulge names of individuals.
    (b) Financial and participation reports--(1) Monthly reports. State 
agencies shall submit financial and program performance data on a 
monthly basis as specified by FCS. Such information may include, but 
shall not be limited to, actual and projected participation, the number 
of persons on waiting lists, and itemized nutrition services and 
administration funds expenditures. State agencies shall require local 
agencies to report such financial and participation information as is 
necessary for the efficient management of food and nutrition services 
and administration funds. When considered necessary and feasible by FCS, 
State agencies may be required to:
    (i) Show in the ``Remarks'' section of the Financial and 
Participation Report the amount of cash allowances exceeding three days 
need being held by their local agencies or contractors; and
    (ii) Provide short narrative explanations of actions taken by the 
State agency to reduce such excess balances.
    (2) Quarterly reports. Quarterly, on dates specified by FCS, State 
agencies shall report the number of persons participating in the Program 
by category (i.e., pregnant, breastfeeding, and postpartum women, 
infants and children) within each priority level as established in 
Sec. 246.7(e)(4).
    (3) Biennial reports. State and local agencies shall provide such 
information as may be required by FCS to fulfill the requirement that 
biennially a report be provided to Congress which includes, at a 
minimum, information on income and nutritional risk characteristics of 
participants and participation in the program by members of families of 
migrant farmworkers.
    (c) Civil rights. The State agency shall ensure that each local 
agency participating under the Program submits a report of racial and 
ethnic participation data to the State agency, at a frequency prescribed 
by FCS.
    (d) Source documentation. To be acceptable for audit purposes, all 
financial and Program performance reports shall be traceable to source 
documentation.
    (e) Certification of reports. Financial and Program reports shall be 
certified as to their completeness and accuracy by the person given that 
responsibility by the State agency.
    (f) Use of reports. FCS will use State agency reports to measure 
progress in achieving objectives set forth in the State Plan, and this 
part, or other State agency performance plans. If it is determined, 
through review of State agency reports, Program or financial analysis, 
or an audit, that a State agency is not meeting the objectives set forth 
in its State Plan, FCS may request additional information including, but 
not limited to, reasons for failure to achieve its objectives.
    (g) Extension of reporting deadline. FCS may extend the due date for 
any Financial and Participation Report upon receiving a justified 
request from the State agency. The State agency should not wait until 
the due date if an extension is to be requested, but should submit the 
request as soon as the need is known. Failure by a State agency to 
submit a report by its due date may result in appropriate enforcement 
actions by FCS in accordance with Sec. 246.19(a)(2), including 
withholding of further grant payments, suspension or termination of the 
grant.

[50 FR 6121, Feb. 13, 1985, as amended at 52 FR 21238, June 4, 1987; 53 
FR 15653, May 3, 1988; 59 FR 11508, Mar. 11, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 246.26  Other provisions.

    (a) No aid reduction. The value of benefits or assistance available 
under the Program shall not be considered as income or resources of 
participants or their families for any purpose under Federal, State, or 
local laws, including, but not limited to, laws relating to taxation, 
welfare and public assistance programs.
    (b) Statistical information. FCS reserves the right to use 
information obtained under the Program in a summary, statistical or 
other form which

[[Page 331]]

does not identify particular individuals.
    (c) Medical information. FCS may require the State or local agencies 
to supply medical data and other information collected under the Program 
in a form that does not identify particular individuals, to enable the 
Secretary or the State agencies to evaluate the effect of food 
intervention upon low-income individuals determined to be at nutritional 
risk.
    (d) Confidentiality. The State agency shall restrict the use or 
disclosure of information obtained from program applicants and 
participants to:
    (1) Persons directly connected with the administration or 
enforcement of the program, including persons investigating or 
prosecuting violations in the WIC Program under Federal, State or local 
authority;
    (2) Representatives of public organizations designated by the chief 
State health officer (or, in the case of Indian State agencies, the 
governing authority) which administer health or welfare programs that 
serve persons categorically eligible for the WIC Program. The State 
agency shall execute a written agreement with each such designated 
organization:
    (i) Specifying that the receiving organization may employ WIC 
Program information only for the purpose of establishing the eligibility 
of WIC applicants and participants for health or welfare programs which 
it administers and conducting outreach to WIC applicants and 
participants for such programs, and
    (ii) Containing the receiving organization's assurance that it will 
not, in turn, disclose the information to a third party; and
    (3) The Comptroller General of the United States for audit and 
examination authorized by law.

[50 FR 6121, Feb. 13, 1985, as amended at 53 FR 35301, Sept. 13, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 246.27  Program information.

    Any person who wishes information, assistance, records or other 
public material shall request such information from the State agency, or 
from the FCS Regional Office serving the appropriate State as listed 
below:
    (a) Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New York, 
Rhode Island, Vermont: U.S. Department of Agriculture, FCS, Northeast 
Region, 10 Causeway Street, room 501, Boston, Massachusetts 02222-1066.
    (b) Delaware, District of Columbia, Maryland, New Jersey, 
Pennsylvania, Puerto Rico, Virginia, Virgin Islands, West Virginia: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, FCS, Mid-Atlantic Region, Mercer Corporate 
Park, 300 Corporate Boulevard, Robbinsville, New Jersey 08691-1598.
    (c) Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Mississippi, North 
Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
FCS, Southeast Region, 77 Forsyth Street, SW., suite 112, Atlanta, 
Georgia 30303.
    (d) Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Ohio, Wisconsin: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, FCS, Midwest Region, 77 West Jackson 
Boulevard--20th Floor, Chicago, Illinois 60604-3507.
    (e) Arkansas, Louisiana, New Mexico, Oklahoma, Texas: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, FCS, Southwest Region, 1100 Commerce Street, 
room 5-C-30, Dallas, Texas 75242.
    (f) Colorado, Iowa, Kansas, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, North 
Dakota, South Dakota, Utah, Wyoming: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
FCS, Mountain Plains Region, 1244 Speer Boulevard, suite 903, Denver, 
Colorado 80204.
    (g) Alaska, American Samoa, Arizona, California, Guam, Hawaii, 
Idaho, Nevada, Oregon, Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, the 
Northern Mariana Islands, Washington: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
FCS, Western Region, 550 Kearny Street, room 400, San Francisco, 
California 94108.

[50 FR 6121, Feb. 13, 1985; 50 FR 8098, Feb. 28, 1985, as amended at 59 
FR 11508, Mar. 11, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 246.28  OMB control numbers.

    The following control numbers have been assigned to the information 
collection requirements in 7 CFR part 246 by the Office of Management 
and Budget pursuant to the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980, Pub. L. 96-
511.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               Currrent 
  7 CFR part 246 section where requirements are described    OMB control
                                                                 no.    
------------------------------------------------------------------------
.4(a) (8), (9), (11).......................................    0584-0386
.5.........................................................    0584-0043
.6.........................................................    0584-0043
.7(a)......................................................    0584-0386
.7(e), (h), (j)............................................    0584-0043
.7(n)......................................................    0584-0386
.7(i)......................................................    0584-A536
.10........................................................    0584-A536
.11(a)(3)..................................................    0584-0386
.11(d).....................................................    0584-0043
.12(f), (i), (i)(3), (j)...................................    0584-0043
.14(d)(1)..................................................    0584-0043
.16(c).....................................................    0584-0043
.17(c)(1)..................................................    0584-0043
.19........................................................    0584-0043
.20(a).....................................................    0584-0043
.25(a), (b)................................................   0584-0043,
                                                               0584-0347
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[50 FR 6121, Feb. 13, 1985, as amended at 53 FR 15653, May 3, 1988; 54 
FR 51295, Dec. 14, 1989; 58 FR 11507, Feb. 26, 1993]


<R03>
PART 247--COMMODITY SUPPLEMENTAL FOOD PROGRAM--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
247.1  General purpose and scope.
247.2  Definitions.
247.3  Administration.
247.4  Donation of supplemental foods.
247.5  State agency plan of program operation and administration.
247.6  Selection of local agencies.
247.7  Certification.
247.8  Nutrition education.
247.9  Financial management systems.
247.10  Caseload assignment and administrative funding.
247.11  Administrative costs.
247.12  Program income.
247.13  Records and reports.
247.14  Procurement and property management standards.
247.15  Audits.
247.16  Investigations.
247.17  Claims.
247.18  Closeout procedures.
247.19  Nondiscrimination.
247.20  Fair hearing procedures.
247.21  Management evaluation and reviews.
247.22  Administrative appeal of State agency decisions.
247.23  Miscellaneous provisions.
247.24  Temporary caseload assignment procedures.

    Authority: Sec. 5, Pub. L. 93-86, 87 Stat. 249, as added by Sec. 
1304(b)(2), Pub. L. 95-113, 91 Stat. 980 (7 U.S.C. 612c note); sec. 
1335, Pub. L. 97-98, 95 Stat. 1293 (7 U.S.C. 612c note); sec. 209, Pub. 
L. 98-8, 97 State. 35 (7 U.S.C. 612c note); sec. 2(8), Pub. L. 98-92, 97 
Stat. 611 (7 U.S.C. 612c note); sec. 1562, Pub. L. 99-198, 99 Stat. 1590 
(7 U.S.C. 612c note); sec. 101(k), Pub. L. 100-202

    Source: 46 FR 6341, Jan. 21, 1981, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 247.1  General purpose and scope.

    This part specifies the policies and prescribes the regulations for 
the Commodity Supplemental Food Program (CSFP) under which women, 
infants and children in low-income groups, vulnerable to malnutrition, 
may obtain supplemental nutritious foods donated by the U.S. Department 
of Agriculture. The purpose of the Program is to provide supplemental 
foods and nutrition education to eligible persons through State or local 
agencies.


<R05>
Sec. 247.2  Definitions.

    For the purpose of this part and of all contracts, guidelines, 
instructions, forms, and other related documents, the term:
    Administrative costs means those direct and indirect costs, 
identified under FMC 74-4, which State and local agencies determine to 
be necessary to support Program operations. Such costs are further 
addressed in Sec. 247.11.
    A-90 means Office of Management and Budget Circular A-90 which 
provides guidance for the coordinated development and operation of 
information systems.
    A-102 means Office of Management and Budget Circular A-102 which 
sets forth uniform administrative requirements for grants-in-aid to 
State and local governments and federally recognized Indian tribal 
governments.
    A-110 means Office of Management and Budget Circular A-110 which 
sets forth uniform administrative requirements for grants to, and other 
agreements with, institutions of higher education, hospitals, and other 
quasi-public and private non-profit organizations.
    Breastfeeding women means women up to one year postpartum who are 
breastfeeding their infants.
    Caseload means the monthly average number of persons a State agency 
is authorized by FCS to serve over a specified period of time.
    Caseload cycle means the period beginning with the later of (1) each 
December 1 or (2) a date not to exceed 30

[[Page 333]]

days after enactment of appropriations legislation for the full fiscal 
year, and ending each November 30.
    Categorical ineligibility means persons who do not meet the 
definition of pregnant women, breastfeeding women, postpartum women, 
infants, children, or elderly persons.
    Certification means the use of criteria and procedures to assess and 
document each applicant's eligibility for the Program.
    Children means persons who are at least one year of age but have not 
reached their sixth birthday.
    Department means the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
    Distributing agency means an agency which has entered into an 
agreement with a State agency and with the Department for the 
distribution of commodities under 7 CFR part 250, subchapter B--Food 
Distribution Regulations.
    Dual participation means simultaneous participation by an individual 
in the CSFP in more than one local agency or clinic, or simultaneous 
participation in the CSFP and in the Special Supplemental Nutrition 
Program for Women, Infants and Children (WIC) 7 CFR part 246.
    Elderly persons means persons 60 years of age or older.
    Fiscal year means the Federal fiscal year covering the period of 12 
calendar months beginning October 1 of any calendar year and ending 
September 30 of the following year.
    FMC 74-4 means Federal Management Circular 74-4, which sets forth 
principles for determining costs applicable to grants and contracts with 
State and local governments.
    FCS means the Food and Consumer Service of the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture.
    Homebound elderly persons means persons who are, in the judgment of 
the local agency, unable to obtain monthly food packages without 
assistance provided by or through the local agency.
    Infants means persons under one year of age.
    Local agency means a public or private nonprofit agency which enters 
into an agreement with the State agency to administer the Program at the 
local level. A local agency determines the eligibility of applicants, 
distributes supplemental foods and provides nutrition education to low-
income persons, either directly or through another agency with which it 
has entered into a written agreement in accordance with Sec. 247.6. In 
addition, existing local agencies are required to maintain the health-
ties at the same level that were effective prior to March 3, 1978.

All other local agencies are encouraged to develop health services 
linkages and, at a minimum, are required to advise participants of the 
importance of health care and where low-income persons can obtain such 
services. The term local agency includes an IHS service unit, an Indian 
tribe, band or group recognized by the Department of the Interior, or an 
intertribal council or group that is an authorized representative of 
Indian tribes, bands or groups recognized by the Department of the 
Interior.
    Nonprofit agency means a private agency which is exempt from income 
tax under the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended.
    Participants means pregnant women, breastfeeding women, postpartum 
women, infants, children and elderly persons who are receiving 
supplemental foods under the Program.
    Participation means the number of persons who have received 
supplemental foods through the Program in the reporting period.
    Postpartum women means women up to 12 months after termination of 
pregnancy.
    Pregnant women means women determined to have one or more embryos or 
fetuses in utero.
    Program means the Commodity Supplemental Food Program (CSFP) of the 
Food and Consumer Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
    Secretary means the Secretary of the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
    SFPD means the Supplemental Food Programs Division of the Food and 
Consumer Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
    State means any of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, the 
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, 
the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands and the Northern Mariana 
Islands.

[[Page 334]]

    State agency means the agency of a State designated by the State to 
administer the Program; or an Indian tribe, band or group recognized by 
the Department of the Interior; or an Intertribal council or group 
recognized by the Department of the Interior and which has an ongoing 
relationship with Indian tribes, bands or groups for other purposes and 
has contracted with them to administer the Program; or the appropriate 
area office of the Indian Health Service of the Department of Health and 
Human Services.
    State Agency Plan of Program Operation and Administration (State 
Plan) means the document which, as required by Sec. 247.5 describes the 
manner in which the State agency intends to implement and operate all 
aspects of Program administration within its jurisdiction.
    Supplemental foods means foods donated by the Department for use by 
eligible persons in low-income groups who are vulnerable to 
malnutrition.
    WIC Program means the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for 
Women, Infants and Children (7 CFR part 246).

[46 FR 6341, Jan. 21, 1981, as amended at 48 FR 29124, June 24, 1983; 51 
FR 32900, Sept. 17, 1986; 53 FR 4838, Feb. 18, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 247.3  Administration.

    (a) Delegation of Authority to FCS. Within the Department, FCS shall 
act on behalf of the Department in the administration of the Program. 
Within FCS, SFPD and the Regional Offices are responsible for Program 
administration. FCS will provide assistance to State and local agencies 
and evaluate all levels of Program operations to assure that the goals 
of the Program are achieved in the most effective and efficient manner 
possible.
    (b) Delegation of authority to State agency. The State agency is 
responsible for all operations under the Program within its jurisdiction 
and shall administer the Program in accordance with the requirements of 
this part, FMC 74-4, A-90, A-95, A-102, A-110, and 7 CFR part 250 
subchapter B where applicable. The State agency shall provide guidance 
to local agencies on all aspects of Program operations. If distribution 
of supplemental foods or other Program operations at the State level are 
performed by an agency of the State other than the State agency, the 
State agency shall enter into a written agreement with the other agency. 
The agreement shall outline the responsibilities of each agency under 
the Program and shall be included in the State Plan. In addition, when a 
State agency enters into an agreement with a distributing agency, the 
distributing agency still must enter into a separate agreement with the 
Department as required by 7 CFR part 250 subchapter B, Food 
Distribution.
    (c) Agreement and State plan. Each State agency desiring to 
administer the Program shall annually submit a State Plan and enter into 
a written agreement with the Department for the administration of the 
Program in the jurisdiction of the State agency in accordance with the 
provisions of this part.
    (d) Delegation of authority to local agency. The local agency shall 
provide Program benefits to participants in the most effective and 
efficient manner, and shall comply with this part and the State Plan.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
0584-0063)

[46 FR 6341, Jan. 21, 1981, as amended at 47 FR 746, Jan. 7, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 247.4  Donation of supplemental foods.

    The Department shall donate supplemental foods for use in the 
Program in accordance with the terms and conditions of this part and 
with the terms and conditions applicable to distributing agencies under 
7 CFR part 250 subchapter B, Food Distribution Regulations, as long as 
these provisions are not inconsistent with this part. The State agency 
is strictly liable to FCS for losses of supplemental foods donated by 
the Department and shall safeguard items from theft, spoilage, other 
damage or destruction or other loss. If supplemental foods donated by 
the Department are lost through any cause, prior to issuance to the 
participant, the State agency shall provide replacement in kind or 
submit payment to FCS in accordance with Sec. 250.6(m) under 7 CFR part 
250 subchapter B, Food Distribution regulations.

[[Page 335]]


<R05>
Sec. 247.5  State agency plan of program operation and administration.

    (a) Requirements. State applications to continue or initiate program 
operations and requests for additional caseload to expand service to 
women, infants, children, and elderly persons shall be made through 
State Plan submissions. By August 15 of each year, the State agency 
shall submit to FCS for approval a State Plan for the following fiscal 
year. State agencies whose Plans are approved by the beginning of the 
fiscal year shall be eligible to commence program operations or receive 
caseload increases at the beginning of the first caseload cycle to 
commence after that date. Plans or Plan amendments to initiate or expand 
operations which are approved after this date may be considered for 
caseload assignment if additional resources become available during that 
caseload cycle. Participating State agencies may request permission 
through a State Plan amendment to convert unused CSFP caseload to serve 
elderly persons. This amendment may be submitted not less than 90 days 
after the State agency has been assigned its caseload. Approval to 
convert caseload shall be effective only during the caseload cycle for 
which the request is made. The State agency may submit the State Plan in 
the format provided by FCS guidance. Alternatively, the State agency may 
submit the Plan in combination with other federally required planning 
documents or develop its own format, provided that the information 
required below is included. FCS requests advance notification that a 
State agency intends to use an alternative format. The State Plan and 
all amendments shall be signed by the State-designated official 
responsible for ensuring that the program is operated in accordance with 
the State Plan. FCS shall provide written approval or denial of a 
completed State Plan or amendment within 30 days of receipt. Within 15 
days after FCS receives an incomplete submission, FCS shall notify the 
State agency that additional information is needed to complete the Plan. 
Any disapproval shall be accompanied by a statement of the reasons for 
the disapproval. Approval of the Plan by FCS is a prerequisite to the 
assignment of caseload and payment of funds for administration to the 
State agency. In approving the State Plan or Plan amendment to initiate 
or expand program operations, FCS shall specify the number of caseload 
slots it believes the State agency can use, and which the State agency 
has the administrative capacity to manage. This determination shall be 
based on the content of the Plan or amendment, demographic data, past 
performance of the State agency, and other information which FCS 
considers relevant. Portions of the State Plan which do not change from 
year to year need not be resubmitted. However, the State agency shall 
provide the title of each section that remains unchanged, as well as the 
year of the last Plan in which the section was submitted. The State Plan 
shall provide the following:
    (1) The names and addresses of each local agency (i) which have an 
agreement with the State agency for Program administration; and (ii) the 
name and address of each certification, food distribution and storage 
site under the jurisdiction of the local agency.
    (2) The specific income criteria and nutritional risk criteria (if 
used) to be used in certifying persons as being in need of supplemental 
foods and the period of time covered by certifications in each local 
agency.
    (3) A description of any plans for requesting program expansion or 
major redistribution of caseloads within the State during the fiscal 
year.
    (4) A description of any plans for conducting outreach to reach 
maximum caseload.
    (5) The plan for nutrition education services for the fiscal year. 
The nutrition education portion of the State Plan shall include an 
evaluation component which includes a systematic procedure for 
participants' input.
    (6) A detailed description of the manner in which foods are 
distributed to each local agency and to participants by the local 
agency.
    (7) A description of the manner in which the State agency plans to 
monitor each local agency.
    (8) A description of plans to involve local agencies, participants 
and other interested parties in the development

[[Page 336]]

of the State Plan for the next fiscal year.
    (9) A description of how the financial management system will 
provide an accurate, current and complete disclosure of the financial 
status of the State's Program including an accurate accounting of all 
administrative funds received and expended.
    (10) A plan for the detection of dual participation within the 
jurisdiction of the State agency. In States where the CSFP and either an 
Indian State agency for CSFP or a WIC Program State agency operate in 
the same area, a copy of the written agreement between the State 
agencies for the detection and prevention of dual participation must be 
submitted.
    (11) Procedures developed in accordance with Sec. 250.6(u) and 
provided to local agencies for reporting, processing and resolving 
complaints about supplemental foods.
    (12) A description of the audit procedures, including: (i) A 
description of the scope and frequency of audits of the State agency and 
local agencies and a delineation of the procedures used that assure 
audit examinations of the CSF Program at reasonable frequency. Audit 
agency guidelines for selecting a sample of grant programs for audits 
should be addressed; (ii) a description of the audit organization in 
sufficient detail to demonstrate the independence of the audit 
organization; and (iii) the number of local agencies in which the CSF 
Program was included in the audit in the last four full quarters, and 
the number of local agency audits planned for the coming fiscal year 
which include examinations of the CSF Program.
    (13) A description of the procedures used to comply with the 
nondiscrimination requirements of title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 
1964, the FCS Civil Rights Instruction 113-2 and with 7 CFR part 15, 
including racial and ethnic participation data collection, public 
notification procedures and the annual civil rights compliance review 
process.
    (14) A description of the fair hearing procedures for participants.
    (15) If a State agency wishes to serve elderly persons, a 
description of plans for providing program benefits to elderly persons 
within the State during the caseload cycle. Such description shall 
include--
    (i) An identification of the elderly population to be served, 
including documentation of the extent of need in the proposed service 
area. Demographic statistics concerning the target population shall be 
included as part of the required documentation; and
    (ii) A description of how the State agency will meet the needs of 
the homebound elderly.
    (16) A State agency requesting permission to convert unused caseload 
slots to serve the elderly shall, in addition to the requirements under 
paragraph (a)(15) of this section, provide assurance that sufficient 
caseload is available to serve elderly persons without restricting 
service levels for women, infants, and children, including data such as 
historical participation levels and other documentation which 
demonstrates that the program needs of women, infants, and children in 
the service area are being met. Such other documentation may include 
evidence of outreach efforts conducted by the State and/or local agency 
to recruit women, infants, and children.
    (b) Submission of local agency information. Local agencies under the 
State agency's jurisdiction may be required to submit information, 
similar to the preceding requirements, to the State agency for its use 
in assuring compliance with this section.
    (c) Amendments. Except as provided in paragraph (a) of this section, 
the State agency may amend the State Plan at any time. The State agency 
shall submit the amendments to FCS for approval.
    (d) Retention of copy. A copy of the approved State Plan shall be 
kept on file at the State agency for public inspection.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
0584-0063)

(44 U.S.C. 3506; E.O. 12372 (July 14, 1982, 47 FR 30959); secs. 401(b), 
Intergovernmental Cooperation Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. 4231(b)))

[46 FR 6341, Jan. 21, 1981, as amended at 47 FR 746, Jan. 7, 1982; 48 FR 
29123, June 24, 1983; 51 FR 32900, Sept. 17, 1986; 53 FR 4838, Feb. 18, 
1988]

[[Page 337]]


<R05>
Sec. 247.6  Selection of local agencies.

    (a) Application of local agencies. The State agency shall require 
each agency which desires approval as a local agency to submit a written 
application which contains sufficient information to enable the State 
agency to make a determination as to the eligibility of that agency. If 
the State agency and the local agency are the same, this requirement 
does not apply. The State agency shall notify the agency of the approval 
or disapproval of its application within 30 days of receipt of the 
agency's application. If the application is denied the State agency 
shall advise the agency of the reasons for the denial in writing and the 
right to appeal as set forth in Sec. 247.22 of this part. When an agency 
submits an application and there are no funds to serve the area, the 
applicant agency shall be notified within 30 days of receipt of the 
application that there are currently no funds available for Program 
initiation or expansion. The State agency shall return the application 
and maintain a record of the name and address of the applicant agency. 
The potential agency whose application was returned shall be notified by 
the State agency when funds become available. The State agency may 
approve the application of a local agency in an area already served by 
the Program or a WIC program only if a new local agency is necessary to 
serve the full extent of need in that area or population. If the State 
agency approves the operation of a new local agency in an area already 
served by an existing Program or a WIC Program, documentation which 
indicates the need for both local agencies in that area shall be 
maintained on file at the State agency for FCS review and evaluation.
    (b) Agreements between State and local agencies. (1) State agencies 
shall enter into agreements with local agencies which are approved to 
participate in the Program. If the State agency and the local agency are 
the same, this requirement does not apply. Copies of the agreement shall 
be kept on file at both the State and local agency for purposes of 
review and audit. Such agreements shall be in writing and shall contain 
the following:
    (i) An assurance that local agencies will comply with all the fiscal 
and operational requirements prescribed by the State agency as required 
by this part; (ii) an assurance that local agencies will provide 
nutrition education as required by this part; (iii) for those local 
agencies in existence prior to March 3, 1978, an assurance that they 
will continue arrangements with health service providers for the 
provision of services to Program participants at least at the level that 
existed on March 2, 1978, and for other local agencies, an assurance 
that they will advise participants of the importance of health care and 
where low-income persons can obtain such care; (iv) an assurance that 
issuance of supplemental food is in accordance with this part and FCS 
food package instructions; (v) a statement that local agencies are 
responsible to the State agency for any loss resulting from improper or 
negligent issuance by them of prescriptions for supplemental foods; (vi) 
a statement that local agencies are responsible to the State agency for 
any Program losses caused by other agencies which have entered into 
agreements with the local agency; (vii) the names and address of each 
certification, food distribution and storage site under the jurisdiction 
of the local agency; and (viii) an assurance that the local agencies 
will maintain accurate and complete records with respect to their 
activities under the Program and retain such records for a period of 3 
years following the date of submission of the final expenditure report 
for the period to which the report pertains.
    (c) Agreements between local agencies and other agencies. A local 
agency which cannot fulfill one or more of these requirements shall 
enter into written agreement with another agency(s) in order to comply 
with these requirements. The written agreement shall state the Program 
responsibilities of the other agency, shall be approved by the State 
agency, and shall be on file at both the State agency and local agency. 
State agency approval of agreements with applicant agencies

[[Page 338]]

shall be accomplished during the application process.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
0584-0063)

[46 FR 6341, Jan. 21, 1981, as amended at 47 FR 746, Jan. 7, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 247.7  Certification.

    (a) Eligibility requirements. To be certified as eligible to receive 
supplemental foods under the Program, each applicant shall meet the 
following requirements:
    (1) Categorical eligibility as an infant, child, pregnant, 
postpartum or breastfeeding woman, or elderly person;
    (2) For women, infants and children, income eligibility for local 
benefits under existing Federal, State or local food, health or welfare 
programs for low-income persons;
    (3) For elderly persons certified on or after September 17, 1986, 
household income at or below 130 percent of the Federal Poverty Income 
Guidelines published annually by the Department of Health and Human 
Services. Elderly persons certified before September 17, 1986, shall be 
subject to the terms and conditions in effect on the date of their 
certification.
    (4) At the State agency's discretion, be determined by a physician, 
a staff member of the local agency or his or her designee to be at 
nutritional risk; and
    (5) Meet a residency requirement if one is established by the State 
agency. The State agency may determine a service area for any local 
agency, and may require that an applicant be residing within the service 
area at the time of application to be eligible for the Program. However, 
the State agency may not impose any durational or fixed residency 
requirements. For example, migrant and seasonal farmworkers entering a 
CSFP service area shall be considered as meeting the residency 
requirement.
    (b) Processing standards. (1) When there are no funds available to 
provide program benefits, the local agency shall maintain waiting lists 
of individuals who visit the local agency to apply for the Program. To 
enable the local agency to contact the individuals when caseload space 
becomes available, these waiting lists shall include the name of the 
applicant, the date placed on the waiting list, an address or phone 
number of the applicant and the applicant's status, i.e., pregnant, 
breastfeeding, child's age. Individuals shall be notified of their 
placement on a waiting list within 20 days after they visit the local 
agency during clinic office hours to request Program benefits.
    (2) The following priorities based on categorical eligibility shall 
be applied when vacancies occur after the local agency has filled all 
caseload, except that these priorities shall not apply to the minimum 
protected caseload assigned under Sec. 247.10(a) (2)(i).
    (i) Priority I. Pregnant women, breastfeeding women, and infants.
    (ii) Priority II. Children ages 1 through 3.
    (iii) Priority III. Children ages 4 through 5.
    (iv) Priority IV. Postpartum women.
    (v) Priority V. Elderly persons.
    (c) Issuance of supplemental foods. Participants shall be issued 
prescriptions for supplemental foods by personnel of the local agency or 
by such other personnel as the local agency may designate. The local 
agency may choose to issue either a one month supply of supplemental 
foods each month or a two month supply of supplemental foods every other 
month. However, local agencies which choose to issue a two month supply 
every other month shall inform participants that they may still receive 
one month's supply if they so request.
    (d) Certification forms. All certification data for each applicant 
shall be recorded on a certification form. At a minimum the information 
on the form shall include the following:
    (1) The person's name and address.
    (2) The date of initial visit to apply for participation and the 
date of the certification or denial.
    (3) The criteria used to determine the person's eligibility or 
ineligibility and the signature and title of the persons making the 
eligibility determination.
    (4) The following statement shall be located directly above the 
applicant's signature line and shall be read by or to the applicant, or 
the applicant's parent or caretaker, before the application is signed:


[[Page 339]]


    This certification form is being completed in connection with the 
receipt of Federal assistance. Program officials may verify information 
on this form. I am aware that deliberate misrepresentation may subject 
me to prosecution under applicable State and Federal statutes. I have 
been advised of my rights and obligations under the Program. I certify 
that the information I have provided for my eligibility determination is 
correct to the best of my knowledge.

    (e) Applicant's rights. The following sentences shall be read by, or 
read to, the applicant or the applicant's parent or caretaker at the 
time of certification. When a significant proportion of the population 
served by a local agency is composed of non-English or limited English 
speaking persons who speak the same language, the sentences shall be 
stated to such persons in a language they understand:
    (1) Standards for participation in the Program are the same for 
everyone regardless of race, color, or national origin.
    (2) You may appeal any decision made by the local agency regarding 
your denial or termination from the Program.
    (3) If your application is approved, the local agency will make 
nutrition education available to you and you are encouraged to 
participate.
    (f) Notification requirements. The following responsibilities shall 
be performed by the State or local agency;
    (1) Each applicant shall be informed during the certification 
procedure of the right to a fair hearing and of the illegality of 
participation in the Commodity Supplemental Food Program in more than 
one local agency, or simultaneous participation in the Com

[[Page 332]]

modity Supplemental Food Program and in the WIC Program.
    (2) A person found ineligible for the Program during a certification 
visit shall be advised in writing of the ineligibility and of the right 
to a fair hearing in accordance with the provisions in Sec. 247.20. The 
reasons for ineligibility shall be properly documented and shall be 
retained on file at the local agency.
    (3) A person found ineligible for the Program at any time during the 
certification period shall be advised in writing 15 days before 
termination of eligibility of the reasons for ineligibility and of the 
right to a fair hearing.
    (4) Each participant shall be notified at least 15 days before the 
expiration of each certification period that eligibility for the Program 
is about to expire.
    (5) Each participant shall receive an explanation of how the food 
delivery system in the local agency operates.
    (6) Each participant shall be advised of the importance of 
participating in ongoing routine health care, the types of health 
services available, where they are located and how they may be obtained.
    (g) Certification periods. (1) Program benefits shall be based upon 
certifications established in accordance with the following time frames.
    (i) Pregnant women shall be certified for the duration of their 
pregnancy and for up to 6 weeks postpartum;
    (ii) Postpartum and breastfeeding women, infants and children shall 
be certified at intervals prescribed by the State agency, provided such 
intervals do not exceed 6 months in length; and
    (iii) Elderly persons, except those certified before September 17, 
1986, shall be certified at intervals prescribed by the State agency, 
provided such intervals do not exceed 6 months in length. The Initial 
and any subsequent odd-numbered certifications of elderly persons first 
certified on or after September 17, 1986 shall be based on an assessment 
of newly submitted information for all applicable eligibility 
requirements, except that age need be established only at the first 
certification. The State agency may authorize local agencies to certify 
such elderly participants for an additional 6 months without reviewing 
the case record or collecting new eligibility data at the second and any 
subsequent even-numbered certifications if there are no women, infants 
or children waiting to be served. State agencies shall, however, require 
local agencies to establish contact with such participants prior to such 
even-numbered certifications in order to confirm each participant's 
address and continued interest in program participation.
    (iv) Elderly persons certified before September 17, 1986 shall be 
subject to the terms and conditions in effect on the date of their 
certification.

[[Page 340]]

    (2) Program benefits may be continued until the end of the month in 
which categorical ineligibility begins, for example, until the end of 
the month in which a child reaches its sixth birthday.
    (h) Restrictions. The following restrictions shall be observed by 
State agencies:
    (1) Participants shall not be required to make any payments in 
money, materials or services for, or in connection with, the receipt of 
supplemental foods. Also, they shall not be solicited in connection with 
the receipt of supplemental foods for voluntary cash contributions for 
any purpose.
    (2) Distribution of supplemental foods shall not be used as a means 
for furthering the political interest of any person or party.
    (i) Transfer of certification. Each State agency shall ensure 
issuance of a verification of certification form to every participant 
who intends to relocate during the certification period. The State 
agency shall require the local agencies under its jurisdiction to accept 
verification of certification forms from participants who have been 
participating in the Program or the WIC Program in another local agency 
within or outside of the jurisdiction of the State agency. The 
verification of certification is valid until the certification period 
expires, and shall be accepted as proof of eligibility for Program 
benefits. However, if the receiving local agency has waiting lists for 
participation, the transferring participant shall be placed on the list 
ahead of all waiting applicants. The verification of certification shall 
include the name of the participant, the date the certification was 
performed, the date the certification period expires, the signature and 
printed or typed name of the local agency official in the originating 
jurisdiction, the name and address of the certifying local agency and an 
identification number or some other means of accountability. The 
verification of certification form shall be uniform throughout the 
jurisdiction of the State agency.
    (j) Dual participation. The State agency shall be responsible for 
the following:
    (1) In conjunction with the local agency, the detection and 
prevention of dual participation within each local agency and between 
local agencies. As part of the certification process, applicants shall 
be informed of the illegality of simultaneous participation in the WIC 
Program and this Program or of simultaneous participation in more than 
one CSFP.
    (2) In areas where a local agency serves the same area as an Indian 
State agency or WIC Program, the CSFP State agency for the Program or 
the WIC State agency shall agree to a plan for the detection and 
prevention of dual participation. The agreement must be in writing and 
must be made prior to operation within the same area.
    (3) Participants found committing dual participation shall be 
terminated from one of the Programs immediately and shall be notified of 
termination from the other program as specified in Sec. 247.7.
    (4) At certification the local agency shall check the identification 
of each participant. For a child participant, an immunization record, 
birth certificate, or other records that local agency personnel consider 
adequate identification shall be acceptable. Also, when issuing 
supplemental foods, the local agency shall check the identification of 
each participant or the identity of the adult responsible for picking up 
the food for a child participant.
    (k) Disqualification. (1) The State agency may disqualify applicants 
and participants from Program participation for a period not to exceed 3 
months if it is established by the State or local agency that the 
applicant, participant, parent, or caretaker fraudulently applied for 
and/or obtained Program benefits. However, if the person who determined 
the participant's eligibility determines that a serious health risk will 
result from disqualification from the Program and the participant is 
currently eligible, the disqualification shall be waived. In addition, 
participants may request a fair hearing, as specified in Sec. 247.20, to 
contest a disqualification.

[[Page 341]]

    (2) For Program purposes, fraud includes, but is not limited to, the 
following actions if they are taken knowingly, willfully and 
deceitfully:
    (i) Making false statements orally or in writing in order to obtain 
benefits to which the individual would not otherwise be eligible; (ii) 
concealing information in order to obtain benefits to which the 
individual is not eligible; (iii) altering Program documents for the 
purpose of receiving increased benefits to which the individual is not 
eligible or for the purpose of transferring benefits to an unauthorized 
individual; (iv) using supplemental foods in an unauthorized manner, 
such as trading or selling the foods; or (v) committing dual 
participation.

[46 FR 6341, Jan. 21, 1981, as amended at 51 FR 32901, Sept. 17, 1986; 
53 FR 4839, Feb. 18, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 247.8  Nutrition education.

    (a) General. Nutrition education shall be thoroughly integrated into 
Program operations. Nutrition education shall be designed to be easily 
understood by individual participants and shall bear a practical 
relationship to their nutritional needs and household situations.
    (b) Goals. Nutrition education shall be based on the following two 
broad goals: (1) To emphasize the relationship of proper nutrition to 
the total concept of good health, with special emphasis on the 
nutritional needs of pregnant, postpartum, and breastfeeding women, 
infants and children under 6 years of age; and
    (2) To assist participants in obtaining a positive change in food 
habits, resulting in improved nutritional status and in the prevention 
of nutrition related problems through maximum use of the supplemental 
and other nutritious foods. This use is to be within the context of 
ethnic, cultural and geographic preferences. Consideration should also 
be given to tailoring nutrition education to meet any limitations 
experienced by groups of participants, such as lack of running water, 
lack of electricity, and limited cooking or refrigeration facilities.
    (c) State agency responsibilities. The State agency shall ensure 
that the local agency fully performs its responsibilities as set forth 
in paragraph (d) of this section. The State agency shall also ensure 
that an evaluation procedure is maintained to determine the 
effectiveness of the nutrition education. Such evaluation procedure 
shall include a systematic procedure for participant input and may be 
conducted directly by State and local agencies or by contract for such 
services, so long as the evaluation is directed by a nutritionist or 
other professional determined by the State agency to be qualified to 
perform the evaluation procedure.
    (d) Local agency responsibilities. (1) The local agency shall make 
nutrition education available to all adult participants and to parents 
or guardians of infant and child participants. Where appropriate, 
nutrition education for child participants is encouraged.
    (2) The local agency shall direct Program funds for nutrition 
education to the benefit of participants and local agency staff members 
involved in nutrition education, in accordance with this part.
    (3) The local agency shall conduct or arrange for nutrition 
education in a manner consistent with the nutrition education portion of 
the State Plan.
    (4) The local agency shall include the following subject matter in 
the instruction given to participants:
    (i) An explanation of the importance of the consumption of the 
supplemental foods by the participant for whom they are prescribed 
rather than by other family members; (ii) reference to any special 
nutritional needs of participants and ways to provide adequate diets; 
(iii) an explanation of the Program as a supplemental rather than a 
total food program; (iv) information on the use of the supplemental 
foods and on the nutritional value of these foods; (v) information on 
the benefits of breastfeeding; and (vi) an explanation of the importance 
of health care.
    (e) Food demonstrations. Any food demonstrations using supplemental 
foods shall be conducted by the State or local agency solely in 
conjunction with nutrition education and primarily for participants 
under the Program. Supplemental foods may not be used for outreach, 
refreshments for participants, or any other such purpose. Supplemental 
foods may not be provided to

[[Page 342]]

any other community agency or facility for any purpose whatsoever, 
unless such agency has entered into a signed written agreement with the 
State or local agency to provide nutrition education services under the 
Program.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
0584-0063)

[46 FR 6341, Jan. 21, 1981, as amended at 47 FR 746, Jan. 7, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 247.9  Financial management systems.

    (a) Disclosure of expenditures. The State agency shall maintain a 
financial management system which provides accurate, current and 
complete disclosure of the financial status of the Program. This shall 
include an accounting for all property and other assets and all Program 
funds received and expended each fiscal year.
    (b) Reports. The State agency shall maintain its financial and 
donated food accounts in a manner sufficient to permit the preparation 
of the reports required in Sec. 247.13.
    (c) Record of expenditures. The State agency shall maintain records 
which adequately identify the source and use of funds expended for 
Program activities. These records shall contain, but are not limited to, 
information pertaining to authorization, receipt of funds, obligations, 
unobligated balances, assets, liabilities, outlays and income.
    (d) Payment of costs. The State agency shall implement procedures 
which ensure prompt and accurate payment of allowable costs, and ensure 
the allowability and allocation of costs in accordance with the cost 
principles and standard provisions of this part, and FMC 74-4.
    (e) Identification of obligated funds. The State agency shall 
implement procedures which accurately identify obligated Program funds 
at the time obligations are made.
    (f) Resolutions of audit findings. The State agency shall implement 
procedures which ensure timely and appropriate resolution of claims and 
other matters resulting from audit findings and recommendations.
    (g) Letters of Credit. All administrative funds made available under 
this section shall be provided to participating State agencies by means 
of issuance of Letters of Credit unless other funding arrangements are 
made with FCS. If at the end of the fiscal year, funds authorized by a 
Letter of Credit issued to any State agency exceed obligations, FCS 
shall reduce the amount of the Letter of Credit by the unobligated 
portion.
    (h) Payments. Letters of Credit shall be issued to the appropriate 
Regional Disbursing Office in favor of the State agency. The State 
agency shall obtain funds needed through presentation by designated 
officials of a payment voucher on the Letter of Credit in accordance 
with procedures prescribed by FCS and consistent with the U.S. Treasury 
Department Circular 1075.
    (i) Transfer of cash. The State agency shall have controls to 
minimize the time elapsing between receipt of Federal funds from the 
U.S. Department of Treasury and the disbursement of these funds for 
Program costs. In the Letter of Credit system, the State agency shall 
make drawdowns from the U.S. Department of Treasury's Regional 
Disbursing Office as close as possible to the time of the actual 
disbursement of funds. Advances made by the State agency to local 
agencies shall also conform to these same standards.
    (j) Local agency financial management. The State agency shall ensure 
that all local agencies develop and implement a financial management 
system consistent with the requirements prescribed by the State agency 
pursuant to the requirements of this section.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
0584-0063)

[46 FR 6341, Jan. 21, 1981, as amended at 47 FR 746, Jan. 7, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 247.10  Caseload assignment and administrative funding.

    (a) State agency caseload assignment. (1) FCS shall assign caseload 
to State agencies on December 1 of each year or within 30 days after 
enactment of appropriations legislation covering the full fiscal year, 
whichever comes later. In the event appropriations legislation for the 
year is not enacted by December 1, caseload assignments for the previous 
caseload cycle shall remain in effect, subject to the availability of 
sufficient funding, until assignments are made for the current caseload 
cycle.

[[Page 343]]

Any caseload assigned for a period beyond the end of the current fiscal 
year shall be available only to the extent that program funds are 
appropriated for the next fiscal year.
    (2) Except as provided by Sec. 247.24 for the first caseload cycle 
to begin after December 1, 1987, and to the extent that funds are 
available, FCS shall assign caseload to State agencies in the following 
order. (i) State agencies for the three elderly feeding projects in 
Detroit, New Orleans, and Des Moines shall be assigned caseload equal to 
the level of participation for each project in December 1985.
    (ii) Currently participating State agencies, except those entering 
their second cycle of program service to women, infants and children or 
to the elderly, shall receive caseload in amounts equal to the greatest 
of their participation of, first, women, infants, children, and then 
elderly persons (except for caseload equal to the December 1985 level of 
participation at the three original elderly feeding projects) during 
September, or average monthly participation for the period July through 
September or for the prior fiscal year: provided, however, that, 
beginning with the caseload cycle which commences on or after December 
1, 1988, a State agency shall not receive caseload under this paragraph 
in excess of the total caseload assigned to the State agency for the 
preceding caseload cycle for women, infants and children, on the one 
hand, or for the elderly, on the other. State agencies entering their 
second caseload cycle of program service to women, infants and children 
or to the elderly shall receive caseload equal to the caseload level 
assigned for their first cycle of program service to the subgroup of 
participants to whom they are providing their second cycle of service.
    (iii) Requests from currently participating State agencies to expand 
service to women, infants, and children shall be addressed in the 
following manner.
    (A) States shall be eligible to receive expansion caseload only if, 
during the preceding September, the period July through September, or 
the prior fiscal year, their average monthly participation of women, 
infants, and children equaled at least 90 percent of their assigned 
caseload level for women, infants, and children, minus any portion of 
such caseload approved for conversion to serve the elderly, for the 
preceding caseload cycle.
    (B) States with timely approved State Plans incorporating such 
requests shall be ranked based on the extent of their capacity to serve 
through WIC and the CSFP, as established by the Federal program 
resources available to them, their categorically eligible populations of 
women, infants, and children under 5 years of age who meet the income 
guidelines for reduced-price meals under the National School Lunch 
Program. The State with the lowest potential penetration shall be ranked 
first.
    (C) In the first round of allocations under this paragraph, the 
State with the lowest potential penetration shall be allocated the 
lesser of sufficient caseload to achieve the same level of penetration 
as the second-lowest-penetration State, or the level of caseload 
approved by FCS. This process shall be repeated, each round of 
allocation including the next-lowest-penetration State, as funds permit 
until all States' approved levels have been assigned. If funds are not 
sufficient to assign the lesser of approved caseload level and 
sufficient caseload to achieve the penetration potential of the next-
ranked State to all applicant State agencies, State agencies 
participating in the final round of allocations shall receive 
assignments enabling them all to achieve the lesser of the same level of 
penetration or their approved levels.
    (iv) Requests from currently participating State agencies to 
initiate or expand service to elderly persons shall be addressed in the 
following manner.
    (A) States shall be eligible to receive expansion caseload only if, 
during the preceding September, the period July through September, or 
the prior fiscal year, their average monthly participation equaled at 
least 90 percent of the caseload available for service to the elderly, 
including conversion slots, for the preceding caseload cycle.
    (B) Each State agency with a timely approved State Plan 
incorporating a request to initiate or expand service to the elderly 
shall be assigned the lesser of an equal share of available caseload

[[Page 344]]

or the amount of expansion caseload FCS has determined that the State 
agency needs and can effectively manage.
    (C) If any States' shares exceed their approved requests, the excess 
caseload shall be divided equally among States whose approved requests 
exceed their shares.
    (v) Requests from State agencies to initiate program services for 
women, infants, and children shall be addressed in the following manner.
    (A) States with timely approved State Plans incorporating requests 
for program initiation shall be ranked based on the extent of their 
capacity to serve through WIC, as established by the Federal WIC 
resources available to them, their potentially eligible populations of 
women, infants, and children under 5 years of age who meet the income 
guidelines for reduced-price meals under the National School Lunch 
Program. The State with the lowest potential penetration shall be ranked 
first.
    (B) In the first round of allocation under this paragraph, the State 
with the lowest potential penetration shall be allocated the lesser of 
sufficient caseload to achieve the same level of penetration as the 
second-lowest-penetration State, or the level of caseload approved by 
FCS. This process shall be repeated, each round of allocation including 
the next-lowest-penetration State, as funds permit until all States' 
approved levels have been assigned. If funds are not sufficient to 
assign the lesser of approved caseload level and sufficient caseload to 
achieve the penetration potential of the next-ranked State to all 
applicant States, States participating in the final round of allocations 
shall receive assignments enabling them all to achieve the lesser of the 
same level of penetration or their approved level.
    (3) State agencies may request permission from FCS to convert 
specific numbers of excess caseload slots allocated under paragraph 
(a)(2)(ii) of this section to the service of elderly persons, subject to 
the time frames specified in Sec. 247.5(a).
    (4) State agencies which have received caseload under paragraph 
(a)(2)(v) of this section shall not be eligible during their first 12 
months of operation to convert caseload to the service of elderly 
persons under paragraph (a)(3) of this section.
    (5) Caseload made available to elderly persons under paragraphs 
(a)(2)(i) (except caseload equal to the level of participation of 
elderly persons in December 1985), (a)(2)(ii), (a)(2)(iv), and (a)(3) of 
this section may not be reserved exclusively for elderly persons, but 
shall be made equally available to women, infants, children, and elderly 
persons until all caseload available to the local agency, except 
caseload equal to December 1985 participation as referenced in paragraph 
(a)(2)(i) of this section, has been filled. At that time, the priority 
system under Sec. 247.7(b)(2) shall be applied.
    (b) Administrative funding. This subsection provides the policies 
and procedures for payment by FCS of funds for administrative costs to 
participating State agencies and disbursement by State agencies to local 
agencies. Funds shall be paid to State agencies as specified in 
Sec. 247.9, Financial Management Systems. As a prerequisite to the 
receipt of such funds each fiscal year, the State agency shall have 
executed a written agreement with the Department and shall have received 
FCS approval of its State Plan.
    (1) Funds for total State administrative costs for each fiscal year 
shall be allocated by FCS based on 15 percent of the sum of the annual 
appropriation for the program and the value of commodities provided 
without charge or credit by the Department to States and distributed by 
local agencies as part of, and in addition to, the food package.
    (2) From the portion of program funds equal to 15 percent of the 
annual appropriation, each State shall receive an administrative grant 
proportionate to its share of the total caseload assigned. Each State 
agency shall receive its share of this funding on a quarterly basis.
    (3) In addition to the funding provided under paragraph (b)(2) of 
this section, States shall receive administrative funding to support 
distribution of commodities provided without charge or credit by the 
Department to States and distributed as part of, and in addition to, the 
program food package.

[[Page 345]]

Prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, FCS shall estimate the value 
of such commodities expected to be distributed to participants by local 
agencies in each State during the fiscal year. Fifteen percent of this 
estimated amount shall be provided to each State agency. Funds provided 
under this paragraph shall be identified and accounted for by FCS 
separately from funds provided under paragraph (b)(2) of this section. 
After the end of the fiscal year, FCS shall compute the actual value of 
such commodities reported as distributed to participants by local 
agencies in each State. Unit values of such commodities shall be 
provided by the Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation Service. FCS 
shall make whatever adjustments are necessary to ensure that each State 
agency has received administrative funding equal to 15 percent of the 
value of such commodities reported as distributed to participants by its 
local agencies during the fiscal year.
    (4) To ensure that State agencies can properly budget for program 
operations, FCS guarantees that 75 percent of the administrative funding 
provided to each State under paragraph (b)(2) of this section will be 
protected from recoveries during the current fiscal year.
    (5) The State agency may retain a percentage of administrative 
funding for State level use, based on the following formula: 15 percent 
of the first $50,000; plus 10 percent of the next $100,000; plus 5 
percent of the next $250,000. The State may retain a maximum amount of 
$30,000 annually for its administrative expenditures. However, if the 
State agency provides warehousing services, FCS approval may be 
requested at the beginning of the applicable fiscal year for funds 
greater than those allowed under the formula, provided that the State 
agency can document the need and ensure that the increase will not 
impose undue hardship on local agencies. The remaining funds and any 
unused funds at the State level shall be distributed to the local 
agencies.
    (6) The State agency, in providing administrative funds to local 
agencies, shall apportion such funds among the local agencies on the 
basis of their respective needs so as to ensure that those local 
agencies evidencing higher administrative costs, while demonstrating 
prudent management and fiscal controls, receive a greater portion of the 
administrative funds.
    (c) Reallocation. FCS reserves the right to periodically recover and 
redistribute unused caseload slots and unspent administrative funds 
(subject to the limitation in paragraph (b)(4) of this section). In the 
event that caseload slots are recovered, they shall be allocated in 
accordance with the order of funding established in Sec. 247.10(a)(2).

[51 FR 32901, Sept. 17, 1986, as amended at 53 FR 4840, Feb. 18, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 247.11  Administrative costs.

    (a) General. Funds provided to State and local agencies may be used 
to cover administrative costs identified under FMC 74-4 which State 
agencies determine to be necessary to carry out the Program within their 
jurisdiction.
    (b) Allowable costs. The following costs are specifically identified 
as illustrative of costs allowable under the Program:
    (1) The cost of certification procedures including: (i) Laboratory 
fees incurred for tests conducted to determine the eligibility of 
persons to participate in the Program; (ii) expendable medical supplies 
necessary to determine the eligibility of persons to participate in the 
Program; and (iii) centrifuges, measuring boards, skin fold calipers, 
spectrophotometers, hematofluorometers, hemoglobinometers, and scales 
used for determining the eligibility of persons, provided that 
expenditure limits will be set by FCS for each piece of equipment and 
expenditures which exceed the limits shall receive prior approval by the 
FCS Regional Office.
    (2) The cost of nutrition education services provided to 
participants and parents and guardians of participants, and used for 
training local agency staff members;
    (3) The cost of transporting food and of administering the food 
distribution system;
    (4) The cost of interpreters and translators for Program materials;
    (5) The cost of outreach services;
    (6) The cost of audits and fair hearings;

[[Page 346]]

    (7) General administration of the State and local agencies 
including, but not limited to, personnel, warehousing, and insurance;
    (8) The cost of monitoring and reviewing Program operations; and
    (9) The cost of transportation for participants to and from the 
local agency when the local agency has determined and documented the 
need for such assistance.
    (c) Restrictions on allowable costs. The following costs are 
allowable only with the prior approval of FCS.
    (1) Automatic Data Processing equipment and system purchases whether 
by outright purchase, rental-purchase agreement or other method of 
purchase;
    (2) Capital expenditures over $2,500.00 such as the cost of 
facilities, equipment, other capital assets and any repairs that 
materially increase the value or useful life of capital assets, provided 
that any subsequent sale of real or personal properties, purchased in 
whole or in part with Program funds, shall be used to reimburse FCS in 
an amount computed by applying to the sale proceeds the percentage of 
FCS participation in the original acquisition costs;
    (3) Occupancy of space under rental-purchase or a lease with option 
to purchase agreements;
    (4) Equipment rental costs where the agreement provides for rental-
purchase or a lease with option to purchase; and
    (5) Management studies performed by agencies or departments other 
than the State or local agency or those performed by outside consultants 
under contract with the State or local agency.
    (d) Unallowable costs. Expenditures by a State agency or local 
agencies which result in costs that may not be applicable to the Program 
objectives are ``unallowable costs.'' A State agency's system for 
financial management shall identify such unallowable costs. In addition 
to unallowable costs identified in FMC 74-4 the following are 
specifically unallowable costs for reimbursement by FCS:
    (1) Costs incurred for rearrangement and alteration of facilities 
not required specifically for the program;
    (2) Actual losses which could have been covered by permissible 
insurance (through an approved self-insurance program or otherwise).


<R05>
Sec. 247.12  Program income.

    Program income means gross income the State agency or local agencies 
earn from grant supported activities, with the exception of income from 
the sale of property as specified in Sec. 247.11(c)(2). Program income 
earned during the agreement period shall be retained by the State agency 
in accordance with the provisions of A-102, Attachment E and used to 
further Program objectives; except that interest earned on Program funds 
at the State or local levels shall be used in accordance with the 
provisions of A-102, Attachment E. A State agency's financial management 
system shall provide guidelines to assure that: income earned is 
recorded as individual transactions within the accounting records in 
conformance with generally accepted accounting principles for recording 
expenditures and revenues; and specifically earmarked Program income is 
used for the purpose(s) intended.


<R05>
Sec. 247.13  Records and reports.

    (a) Recordkeeping requirements. Each State agency shall, in 
accordance with Sec. 250.6(r), maintain accurate and complete records 
with respect to the receipt, disposal, and inventory of supplemental 
foods, including the determination made as to liability for any improper 
distribution or use of, or loss of, or damage to, such foods and the 
result obtained from the pursuit of claims arising in favor of the State 
agency. Accurate and complete records shall also be maintained with 
respect to the receipt and disbursement of administrative funds. State 
agencies shall require all local agencies to maintain accurate and 
complete records with respect to the receipt, disposal and inventory of 
supplemental foods and with respect to receipt and disbursement of 
administrative funds. All records required by this section shall be 
retained for a period of 3 years following the date of submission of the 
annual expenditure report for the period to which the reports pertain. 
All records, except medical case records of

[[Page 347]]

participants (unless they are the only source of certification data), 
shall be available during normal business hours for representatives of 
the Department and the General Accounting Office of the United States to 
inspect, audit, and copy. Any reports resulting from such examinations 
shall not divulge names of individuals.
    (b) Financial reports. All financial data shall be submitted 
quarterly on the S.F. 269(WIC/CSFP) and/or the S.F. 272 for State 
agencies on the check payment system.
    (c) Participation and food distribution reports. Participation and 
Food Distribution reports FCS-153 and FCS-155 shall be submitted as 
required by FCS, at a frequency prescribed by FCS. Annually, a physical 
inventory of all foods at each storage and distribution site is required 
to be submitted to FCS at a date specified by FCS.
    (d) Civil rights. Each local agency participating under the Program 
shall submit a report of racial and ethnic participation data FCS-191, 
at a frequency prescribed by FCS.
    (e) Audit acceptability of reports. To be acceptable for audit 
purposes, all financial and Program performance reports shall be 
traceable to source documentation.
    (f) Certification of reports. Financial and Program reports shall be 
certified as to their completeness and accuracy by the person given that 
responsibility by the State agency.
    (g) Use of reports. FCS shall use State agency reports to measure 
progress in achieving objectives set forth in the State Plan. If it is 
determined, through review of State agency reports, Program or financial 
analysis, or an audit, that a State agency is not operating according to 
its State Plan, FCS may request additional information and take other 
appropriate actions.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
0584-0063)

(44 U.S.C. 3506)

[46 FR 6341, Jan. 21, 1981, as amended at 47 FR 746, Jan. 7, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 247.14  Procurement and property management standards.

    (a) Requirements. State and local agencies shall comply with the 
requirements of Circular A-102, Attachment 0 for procurement of 
equipment and other services with Program funds. These requirements are 
adopted by FCS to ensure that such materials and services are obtained 
for the Program in an effective manner and in compliance with the 
provisions of applicable law and executive orders.
    (b) Contractual responsibilities. The standards contained in 
Circulars A-90, A-102 and A-110, where applicable, do not relieve the 
State or local agency of the responsibilities arising under its 
contracts. The State agency is the responsible authority, without 
recourse to FCS, regarding the settlement and satisfaction of all 
contractual and administrative issues arising out of procurements 
entered into in connection with the Program. This includes, but is not 
limited to: Disputes, claims, protests of awards, source evaluation, or 
other matters of a contractual nature. Matters concerning violation of 
law are to be referred to such local, State or Federal authority as may 
have proper jurisdiction.
    (c) State regulations. The State or local agency may use its own 
procurement regulations which reflect applicable State and local 
regulations, provided that procurements made with Program funds adhere 
to the standards set forth in Circulars A-90, A-102 and Circular A-110, 
where applicable.
    (d) Property acquired with Program funds. State and local agencies 
shall observe the standards prescribed in A-102, Attachment N, and A-
110, Attachment N, where applicable, in their utilization and 
disposition of property acquired in whole or in part with Program funds.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
0584-0063)

(44 U.S.C. 3506)

[46 FR 6341, Jan. 21, 1981, as amended at 47 FR 746, Jan. 7, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 247.15  Audits.

    (a) Federal access to information. The Secretary, the Comptroller 
General of the United States, or any of their duly authorized 
representatives, or State auditors shall have access to any books, 
documents, papers, and records of the State and local agencies and their 
contractors, for the purpose of

[[Page 348]]

making surveys, audits, examinations, excerpts, and transcripts.
    (b) State agency response. The State agency may take exception to 
particular audit findings and recommendations. The State agency shall 
submit a response or statement to FCS as to the action taken or planned 
regarding the findings. A proposed corrective action plan developed and 
submitted by the State agency shall include specific time frames for its 
implementation and for completion of the correction of deficiencies and 
problems leading to the deficiencies.
    (c) Corrective action. FCS shall determine whether Program 
deficiencies have been adequately corrected. If additional corrective 
action is necessary, FCS shall schedule a followup review, allowing a 
reasonable time for such corrective action to be taken.
    (d) State sponsored audits. (1) Each State agency shall provide for 
an independent audit of the financial operations of the State agency and 
local agencies. Audits may be conducted by State and local government 
audit staffs, State licensed public accountants who were licensed on or 
before December 31, 1970, or by Certified Public Accountants and audit 
firms under contract to the State or local agencies. Audits shall 
conform to: ``The Standards of Audit of Governmental Organizations, 
Program Activities and Functions,'' issued by the Comptroller General of 
the United States (Reprint 1974, for sale by the Superintendent of 
Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402); the 
``Guidelines for Financial and Compliance Audits of Federally Assisted 
Programs,'' issued by the U.S. General Accounting Office, October 1978 
(for sale by the U.S. General Accounting Office, Distribution Section, 
Room 1518, 441 G Street, NW., Washington, DC 20013); any compliance 
supplements approved by OMB; and generally accepted auditing standards 
established by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants. 
An audit shall be used to determine whether:
    (i) Financial operations are properly conducted; (ii) the financial 
reports are fairly presented; (iii) the State or local agency has 
complied with applicable laws, regulations, and administrative 
requirements pertaining to financial management; and (iv) proper 
inventory controls (physical and paper) are being maintained.
    (2) The State agency shall conduct audits in accordance with the 
provisions of A-102, Attachment P. Audits of the State agency and the 
local agencies under the State agency's jurisdiction shall be performed 
in a representative sample of grant program audit examinations during 
each audit cycle which occurs, not less frequency than once every two 
years. In some audit cycles, a grant program or programs other than this 
Program may be audited. However, audits of the Program shall be 
performed at intervals frequent enough to ensure consistency with good 
Program management. Also, at any time, the Department, FCS or the State 
agency may at its discretion audit a Program if an audit appears to be 
warranted. If FCS in the course of Program reviews of State agency 
operations finds that the efficiency and effectiveness of the State 
agency's financial management system is in question, FCS may request the 
State agency to include the Program in the sample for the next audit 
examination.
    (3) Each State agency shall make all State or local agency sponsored 
audit reports of Program operations under its jurisdiction available for 
the Department's review upon request. The cost of these audits shall be 
considered a part of administrative costs and funded from either State 
or local agency administrative funds.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
0584-0063)

(44 U.S.C. 3506)

[46 FR 6341, Jan. 21, 1981, as amended at 47 FR 746, Jan. 7, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 247.16  Investigations.

    (a) Authority. The Department may make an investigation of any 
allegation of noncompliance with this part. The investigation may 
include, where appropriate, a review of pertinent practices and policies 
of any State or local agency, the circumstances under which the possible 
noncompliance with this part occurred, and other factors relevant to a 
determination as to whether the State or local agency has failed to

[[Page 349]]

comply with the requirements of this part.
    (b) Confidentiality. No State or local agency, participant, or other 
person shall intimidate, threaten, coerce, or discriminate against any 
individual for the purpose of interfering with any right or privilege 
under this part because the individual has made a complaint or formal 
allegation, or testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an 
investigation, proceeding, or hearing under this part. The identity of 
every complainant shall be kept confidential except to the extent 
necessary to carry out the purpose of this part, including the conduct 
of any investigation, hearing, or judicial proceeding.


<R05>
Sec. 247.17  Claims.

    If FCS determines through a review of the State agency's reports, 
program or financial analysis, monitoring, audit, or otherwise, that any 
Program funds provided to a State agency for administrative purposes 
were, through State agency or local agency negligence or fraud, misused 
or otherwise diverted from Program purposes, a claim shall be made by 
FCS against the State agency, and the State agency shall pay promptly to 
FCS a sum equal to the amount of the administrative funds so misused or 
diverted. Further, if FCS determines that any part of the money received 
by a State agency was lost as a result of thefts, embezzlements, or 
unexplained causes, the State agency shall, on demand by FCS, pay to FCS 
a sum equal to the amount of the money so lost. Claims for losses or 
misuse of supplemental foods shall be handled in accordance with 
Sec. 250.6(m), 7 CFR part 250--Subchapter B--Food Distribution. The 
State agency shall have full opportunity to submit evidence, 
explanations or information concerning alleged instances of 
noncompliance or diversion before a final determination is made in such 
cases.


<R05>
Sec. 247.18  Closeout procedures.

    (a) Fiscal year closeout reports. State agencies shall submit 
preliminary and final closeout reports for each fiscal year or part 
thereof. All obligations shall be liquidated before final closure of a 
fiscal year grant. Obligations shall be reported for the fiscal year in 
which they occur State agencies shall:
    (1) Submit to FCS, within 30 days after the end of the fiscal year, 
preliminary financial reports which show cumulative actual expenditures 
and obligations for the fiscal year, or part thereof, for which Program 
funds were made available; and
    (2) Submit to FCS, within 90 days after the end of the fiscal year, 
final fiscal year closeout reports.
    (b) Revised closeout reports. Revised closeout reports may be 
submitted at any time. However, FCS shall not be responsible for 
reimbursing unpaid obligations later than one year after the close of 
the fiscal year in which they were incurred.
    (c) Grant closeout procedures. When grants to State agencies are 
terminated, the following closeout procedures for the Program shall be 
performed in accordance with OMB Circular A-102.
    (1) Termination for cause. FCS may terminate a State agency's 
participation under the Program, in whole or in part, whenever FCS 
determines that the State agency has failed to comply with the 
conditions prescribed in this part. FCS shall promptly notify the State 
agency in writing of the termination and the reasons for the 
termination, including the effective date. A State agency shall 
terminate a local agency's participation under the Program by written 
notice whenever it is determined by FCS or the State agency that the 
local agency has failed to comply with the requirements of the Program. 
When a State agency's participation under the Program is terminated for 
cause, any payments made to the State agency, or any recoveries by FCS 
from the State agency, shall be in conformance with the legal rights and 
liabilities of the parties.
    (2) Termination for convenience. FCS or the State agency may 
terminate the State agency's participation under the Program, in whole 
or in part, when both parties agree that continuation under the Program 
would not produce beneficial results commensurate with the further 
expenditure of funds. The State agency or the local agency may

[[Page 350]]

terminate the local agency's participation, in whole or in part, under 
the same conditions. The two parties shall agree upon the termination 
conditions, including the effective date thereof and, in the case of 
partial termination, the portion to be terminated. The State agency 
shall not incur new obligations for the terminated portion after the 
effective date, and shall cancel as many outstanding obligations as 
possible. FCS shall allow full credit to the State agency for the 
Federal share of the noncancellable obligations, properly incurred by 
the State agency prior to termination.


<R05>
Sec. 247.19  Nondiscrimination.

    (a) Requirement. The State agency shall comply with the requirements 
of title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the FCS Civil Rights 
Instruction 113-2 and the Department's regulations concerning 
nondiscrimination (7 CFR part 15), including requirements of racial and 
ethnic participation data collection, public notification of the 
nondiscrimination policy, and annual reviews of each local agency to 
assure compliance with such policy, to the end that no person shall, on 
the grounds of race, color or national origin, be excluded from 
participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be otherwise subjected 
to discrimination under the Program.
    (b) Non-English materials and staff. Where a significant proportion 
of the population of the area served by a local agency is composed of 
non-English or limited English speaking persons who speak the same 
language, the State agency shall take action to ensure that Program 
information, except certification forms, is provided to such persons in 
the appropriate language orally and in writing. The State agency shall 
ensure that there are bilingual staff members or interpreters available 
to serve these persons.
    (c) Complaints. Complaints of discrimination filed by applicants or 
participants shall be referred to the Director, Supplemental Food 
Programs Division, Food and Consumer Service, U.S.D.A., Washington, DC 
20250.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
0584-0063)

(44 U.S.C. 3506)

[46 FR 6341, Jan. 21, 1981, as amended at 47 FR 746, Jan. 7, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 247.20  Fair hearing procedures.

    (a) Availability of hearings. The State agency shall provide a 
hearing procedure through which any individual may appeal a State or 
local agency action which results in the denial or termination of 
benefits to the individual. The State agency shall conform to Program 
hearing procedures as outlined in this section at all times unless the 
State has an alternate hearing procedure whereby participants can appeal 
State or local agency actions. This alternate procedure may be used with 
FCS approval.
    (b) Notification of appeal rights. At the time of application each 
applicant shall be informed of the right to a fair hearing.

At the time of denial or termination of benefits, each individual shall 
be informed in writing of the right to a fair hearing, of the method by 
which a hearing may be requested, and that any positions or arguments on 
behalf of the individual may be presented personally or by a 
representative such as a relative, friend, legal counsel or other 
spokesperson. Such notification is not required at the expiration of a 
certification period.
    (c) Request for hearing. A request for a hearing is defined as any 
clear expression by the individual or the individual's parent, guardian 
or other representative, that an opportunity to present its case to a 
higher authority is desired. The State or local agency shall not limit 
or interfere with the individual's freedom to request a hearing.
    (d) Time limit for request. The State or local agency shall provide 
individuals a reasonable period of time to request fair hearings. Such 
time limit shall not be less than 60 days from the date the agency mails 
or gives the applicant or participant the notice of adverse action

[[Page 351]]

to deny or terminate benefits, as required in Sec. 247.7(f)(2).
    (e) Denial or dismissal of request. A request for a hearing shall 
not be denied or dismissed unless:
    (1) The request is not received within the time limit set by the 
State agency in accordance with paragraph (d) of this section.
    (2) The request is withdrawn in writing by the applicant or a 
writing by the applicant or a representative.
    (3) The applicant or representative fails, without good cause, to 
appear at the scheduled hearing.
    (f) Continuation of benefits. Participants who appeal the 
termination of benefits within the 15 day advance adverse notice period 
provided by Sec. 247.7(f)(2) shall continue to receive Program benefits 
until the hearing official reaches a decision. Applicants who are denied 
benefits at initial certification or at subsequent certifications may 
appeal the denial but shall not receive benefits while awaiting the 
hearing.
    (g) Rules of procedure. The State and local agency shall process 
each request for a hearing under uniform rules of procedure. The uniform 
rules of procedure shall be available for public inspection and copying. 
At a minimum, the uniform rules of procedure shall include: The time 
limits for requesting and conducting a hearing; all advance notice 
requirements; the rules of conduct at the hearing; and the rights and 
responsibilities of the applicant. The procedures shall not be unduly 
complex or legalistic and the applicant's background shall be taken into 
consideration.
    (h) Hearing official. Hearings shall be conducted by an impartial 
official who does not have any personal stake or involvement in the 
decision and who was not directly involved in the initial determination 
of the action being contested. The hearing official shall:
    (1) Administer oaths or affirmations if required by the State;
    (2) Ensure that all relevant issues are considered;
    (3) Request, receive and make part of the hearing record all 
evidence determined necessary to decide the issues being raised;
    (4) Regulate the conduct and course of the hearing consistent with 
due process to ensure an orderly hearing;
    (5) Render a hearing decision which will resolve the dispute.
    (i) Conduct of the hearing. The hearing shall be accessible to the 
applicant. The State or local agency shall provide the applicant with a 
minimum of 10 days advance written notice of time and place of the 
hearing and shall enclose the rules of procedure. The State and local 
agency shall also provide the applicant or representative an opportunity 
to:
    (1) Examine, prior to and during hearing, the documents and records 
presented to support the decision under appeal; (2) be assisted or 
represented by an attorney or other persons; (3) bring witnesses; (4) 
advance arguments without undue interference; (5) question or refute any 
testimony or evidence, including an opportunity to confront and cross-
examine adverse witnesses; and (6) submit evidence to establish all 
pertinent facts and circumstances in the case.
    (j) Hearing decisions. (1) Decisions of the hearing official shall 
comply with Federal law or regulations and shall be based on facts in 
the hearing record. The verbatim transcript or recording of testimony 
and exhibits, or an official report containing the substance of what 
transpired at the hearing, together with all papers and requests filed 
in the proceeding shall constitute the exclusive record for a final 
decision by the hearing official. This record shall be retained in 
accordance with Sec. 247.13. This record shall also be available, for 
copying and inspection, to the appellant or representative at any 
reasonable time.
    (2) A decision by the hearing official shall be binding on the local 
agency and shall summarize the facts of the case, specify the reasons 
for the decision, and identify the supporting evidence and the pertinent 
regulations. The decision shall become a part of the record.
    (3) Within 45 days of the request for the hearing, the applicant or 
representative shall be notified in writing of the decision and the 
reasons for the decision in accordance with paragraph (j)(2) of this 
section. Also, if the decision is

[[Page 352]]

in the favor of the applicant and benefits were denied, benefits shall 
begin within this 45-day time period. If the decision is in favor of the 
agency, as soon as administratively feasible any continued benefits 
shall be terminated as decided by the hearing official.
    (4) All State and local agency hearing records and decisions shall 
be available for public inspection and copying, subject to the 
disclosure safeguards provided in Sec. 247.22(d), and provided the names 
and addresses of participants and other members of the public are kept 
confidential.
    (k) Judicial review. If a State level decision upholds the agency 
action, the State agency shall explain any available State review of the 
decision and any State rehearing process. If neither are available or 
have been exhausted, the State agency shall explain the right to pursue 
judicial review of the decision.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
0584-0063)

(44 U.S.C. 3506)

[46 FR 6341, Jan. 21, 1981, as amended at 47 FR 746, Jan. 7, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 247.21  Management evaluation and reviews.

    (a) General. FCS and each State agency shall establish a management 
evaluation system in order to assess the accomplishment of Program 
objectives as provided under these regulations, the State Plan, and the 
written agreement with the Department. FCS will provide assistance to 
States in discharging this responsibility, and will establish standards 
and procedures to determine how well the objectives of this part are 
being accomplished.
    (b) Responsibilities of FCS. FCS shall establish evaluation 
procedures to determine whether State agencies carry out the purposes 
and provisions of this part, the State Plan, and the written agreement 
with the Department. As a part of the evaluation procedure, FCS shall 
review audits performed by the State agency to ensure that the Program 
at both the State and local levels has been included in audit 
examinations at a reasonable frequency. These evaluations shall include 
a review of each State agency, including on-site reviews of selected 
local agencies. These evaluations will measure the State agency's 
progress toward meeting the objective outlined in its State Plan and 
compliance with these regulations.
    (c) Responsibilities of State agencies. The State agency is 
responsible for meeting the following requirements:
    (1) The State agency shall establish evaluation and review 
procedures and document the results of such procedures. The procedures 
shall include, but not be limited to:
    (i) Annual monitoring of the operation of all local agencies to 
evaluate certification procedures, management, nutrition education, 
civil rights compliance, food storage, inventory accountability, and 
financial management systems. However, more frequent reviews may be 
performed as the State agency deems necessary. The State agency shall 
provide a continuing evaluation of each local agency through on-site 
reviews of the local agency, reviews of local agency reports including 
inventory reports, reviews of storage facilities and safeguards for 
supplemental foods.
    (ii) Instituting the necessary followup procedures to correct 
identified problem areas.
    (2) On its own initiative or when required by FCS, the State agency 
shall provide special reports on Program activities, and take positive 
action to correct deficiencies in Program operations.
    (3) The State agency shall require that local agencies establish 
Program review procedures to be used in reviewing their own operations 
and those of subsidiaries or contractors.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
0584-0063)

(44 U.S.C. 3506)

[46 FR 6341, Jan. 21, 1981, as amended at 47 FR 746, Jan. 7, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 247.22  Administrative appeal of State agency decisions.

    (a) Requirements. The State agency shall provide a hearing procedure 
whereby a local agency adversely affected by a State action may appeal 
the action. The right to appeal shall be granted when the local agency's 
application to participate is denied, when participation is terminated, 
when a

[[Page 353]]

contract is not renewed by the State agency or when any other adverse 
action which affects participation is taken. The adverse action shall be 
postponed until a hearing decision is reached.
    (b) Procedure. The State agency hearing procedure shall at a minimum 
provide the local agency:
    (1) Adequate advance notice of the time and place of the hearing to 
provide all parties involved sufficient time to prepare for the hearing;
    (2) The opportunity to present its case;
    (3) The opportunity to confront and cross-examine adverse witnesses;
    (4) The opportunity to be represented by counsel, if desired;
    (5) The opportunity to review the case record prior to the hearing;
    (6) An impartial decision maker, whose decision as to the validity 
of the State or local agency's action shall rest solely on the evidence 
presented at the hearing and the statutory and regulatory provisions 
governing the Program. The basis for the decision shall be stated in 
writing, although it need not amount to a full opinion or contain formal 
finding of fact and conclusions of law; and
    (7) Written notification of the decision concerning the appeal, 
within 60 days from the date of the request for a hearing.


<R05>
Sec. 247.23  Miscellaneous provisions.

    (a) No aid reduction. The value of benefits or assistance available 
under the Program shall not be considered as income to or resources of 
participants or their families for any purpose under Federal, State or 
local laws, including, but not limited to, laws relating to taxation, 
welfare and public assistance programs.
    (b) Statistical information. FCS reserves the right to use 
information obtained under the Program in a summary, statistical or 
other form which does not identify particular individuals. FCS may 
require the State or local agencies to supply data and other information 
collected under the Program in a form that does not identify particular 
individuals, to enable the Secretary or the State agencies to evaluate 
the effect of food intervention upon low-income individuals determined 
to be eligible for Program benefits.
    (c) Confidentiality. Each State agency shall restrict the use or 
disclosure of information obtained from Program applicants or 
participants to persons directly connected with the administration or 
enforcement of the Program.
    (d) Public information. Any person who wishes information, 
assistance, records or other public material shall request such 
information from the State agency, or from the FCS Regional Office 
serving the appropriate State as listed below:
    (1) Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, 
Vermont:

U.S. Department of Agriculture, FCS, New England Region, 33 North 
Avenue, Burlington, Massachusetts 01803.

    (2) Delaware, District of Columbia, Maryland, New Jersey, New York, 
Pennsylvania, Puerto Rico, Virginia, Virgin Islands, West Virginia:

U.S. Department of Agriculture, FCS, Mid-Atlantic Region, One Vahlsing 
Center, Robbinsville, New Jersey 08691.

    (3) Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Mississippi, North 
Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee:

U.S. Department of Agriculture, FCS, Southeast Region, 1100 Spring 
Street, NW, Atlanta, Georgia 30309.

    (4) Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Ohio, Wisconsin:

U.S. Department of Agriculture, FCS, Midwest Region, 536 South Clark 
Street, Chicago, Illinois 60605.

    (5) Arkansas, Louisiana, New Mexico, Oklahoma, Texas:

U.S. Department of Agriculture, FCS, Southwest Region, 1100 Commerce 
Street, Room 5-C-30, Dallas, Texas 75242.

    (6) Colorado, Iowa, Kansas, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, North 
Dakota, South Dakota, Utah, Wyoming:

U.S. Department of Agriculture, FCS, Mountain Plains Region, 2420 West 
26th Avenue, Room 430-D, Denver, Colorado 80211.

    (7) Alaska, American Samoa, Arizona, California, Guam, Hawaii, 
Idaho, Nevada, Oregon, Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, 
Washington:

U.S. Department of Agriculture, FCS, Western Region, 550 Kearney Street, 
Room 400, San Francisco, California 94108.

[[Page 354]]


<R05>
Sec. 247.24  Temporary caseload assignment procedures.

    (a) General. The following procedures shall apply only to caseload 
allocations for the first caseload cycle to begin after December 1, 
1987.
    (b) Currently participating State agencies. State agencies 
participating in the program in 1987 shall under Sec. 247.10(a)(2)(i)-
(iv) be allocated caseload for service to 145,000 women, infants, and 
children and 80,000 elderly persons.
    (c) Approved applicant State agencies. Caseload remaining after 
allocations pursuant to paragraph (b) of this section shall be made 
available to all applicant State agencies with approved State Plans as 
of the date of caseload allocation in proportion to each State agency's 
caseload request as a percentage of the total caseload requested by all 
such State agencies.

[53 FR 4841, Feb. 18, 1988]


<R03>
PART 248--WIC FARMERS' MARKET NUTRITION PROGRAM (FMNP)--Table of Contents

<R05>


                           Subpart A--General

Sec.
248.1  General purpose and scope.
248.2  Definitions.
248.3  Administration.

                   Subpart B--State Agency Eligibility

248.4  State Plan.
248.5  Selection of new State agencies.

                    Subpart C--Recipient Eligibility

248.6  Recipient eligibility.
248.7  Nondiscrimination.

                      Subpart D--Recipient Benefits

248.8  Level of benefits and eligible foods.
248.9  Nutrition education.

                   Subpart E--State Agency Provisions

248.10  Coupon and market management.
248.11  Financial management system.
248.12  FMNP costs.
248.13  FMNP income.
248.14  Distribution of funds.
248.15  Closeout procedures.
248.16  Administrative appeal of State agency decisions.

           Subpart F--Monitoring and Review of State Agencies

248.17  Management evaluations and reviews.
248.18  Audits.
248.19  Investigations.

                   Subpart G--Miscellaneous Provisions

248.20  Claims and penalties.
248.21  Procurement and property management.
248.22  Nonprocurement debarment/suspension, drug-free workplace, and 
          lobbying restrictions.
248.23  Records and reports.
248.24  Other provisions.
248.25  FMNP information.
248.26  OMB control number.

    Authority: 42 U.S.C. 1786.

    Source: 59 FR 11517, Mar. 11, 1994, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                           Subpart A--General


<R05>
Sec. 248.1  General purpose and scope.

    This part announces regulations under which the Secretary of 
Agriculture shall carry out the WIC Farmers' Market Nutrition Program. 
The dual purposes of the FMNP are:
    (a) To provide resources in the form of fresh, nutritious, 
unprepared foods (fruits and vegetables) from farmers' markets to women, 
infants, and children who are nutritionally at risk and who are 
participating in the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, 
Infants and Children (WIC) or are on the waiting list for the WIC 
Program; and
    (b) To expand the awareness, use of and sales at farmers' markets.
    This will be accomplished through payment of cash grants to approved 
State agencies which administer the FMNP and deliver benefits at no cost 
to eligible persons. The FMNP shall be supplementary to the food stamp 
program carried out under the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 U.S.C. 2011 et 
seq.) and to any other Federal or State program under which foods are 
distributed to needy families in lieu of food stamps.


<R05>
Sec. 248.2  Definitions.

    For the purpose of this part and all contracts, guidelines, 
instructions, forms and other documents related hereto, the term:

[[Page 355]]

    Administrative costs means those direct and indirect costs, 
exclusive of food costs, as defined in Sec. 248.12(b), which State 
agencies determine to be necessary to support FMNP operations. 
Administrative costs include, but are not limited to, the costs of 
administration, start-up, training, monitoring, auditing, the 
development of and accountability for coupon and market management, 
nutrition education, outreach, eligibility determination, and 
developing, printing, and distributing coupons.
    Compliance buy means a covert, on-site investigation in which a FMNP 
representative poses as a FMNP participant and transacts one or more 
FMNP food coupons.
    Coupon means a coupon, voucher, or other negotiable financial 
instrument by which benefits under the FMNP are transferred to 
recipients.
    Days means calendar days.
    Demonstration project means the Farmers' Market Coupon Demonstration 
Project authorized by section 17(m) of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966 
(CNA), (42 U.S.C. 1786(m)), as amended by section 501 of the Hunger 
Prevention Act of 1988 (Pub. L. 100-435), enacted September 19, 1988. 
Public Law 102-314 authorized the Secretary to competitively award, 
subject to the availability of funds, a 3-year grant (which was 
subsequently extended for an additional year by Public Law 102-142) to 
up to 10 States that submitted applications that were approved for the 
establishment of demonstration projects designed to provide WIC 
participants with coupons that could be exchanged for fresh, nutritious, 
unprepared foods at farmers' markets. Those States are: Connecticut, 
Iowa, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, New York, Pennsylvania, Texas, 
Vermont, and Washington.
    Department means the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
    Eligible foods means fresh, nutritious, unprepared, locally grown 
fruits, vegetables and herbs for human consumption. Eligible foods may 
not be processed or prepared beyond their natural state except for usual 
harvesting and cleaning processes. Honey, maple syrup, cider, nuts, 
seeds, eggs, meat, cheese and seaffod are examples of foods not eligible 
for purposes of the FMNP. State agencies shall consider locally grown to 
mean produce grown only within State borders but may also define it to 
include areas in neighboring States adjacent to its borders. Under no 
circumstances can produce grown outside of the United States and its 
territories be considered eligible foods.
    Farmer means an individual authorized to sell produce at 
participating farmers' markets. Individuals who exclusively sell produce 
grown by someone else, such as wholesale distributors, cannot be 
authorized to participate in the FMNP. For purposes of this part, the 
term ``farmer'' shall mean ``producer'' as that term is used in section 
17(m)(6)(D) of the CNA (42 U.S.C. 1786(m)(6)(D)). A participating State 
agency has the option to authorize individual farmers or farmers' 
markets.
    Farmers' market means an association of local farmers who assemble 
at a defined location for the purpose of selling their produce directly 
to consumers. In cases where recipient access to farmers' markets is an 
issue, with prior FCS approval this definition may be expanded at the 
State agency's option to include farmstands at which authorized farmers 
sell their produce.
    Farmstand means a location at which a single, individual farmer 
sells his/her produce directly to consumers. This is in contrast to a 
group or association of farmers selling their produce at a farmers' 
market. With prior FCS approval, through the State Plan process, a State 
agency may authorize a farmstand or a nonprofit organization operating a 
farmstand to participate in the FMNP where necessary to ensure adequate 
recipient access to farmers' markets.
    Fiscal year means the period of 12 calendar months beginning October 
1 of any calendar year and ending September 30 of the following calendar 
year.
    FMNP funds means Federal grant funds provided for the FMNP, plus the 
required non-Federal match.
    FCS means the Food and Consumer Service of the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture.
    Food costs means the cost of eligible supplemental foods.

[[Page 356]]

    Household has the same definition as that of ``family'' defined in 
Sec. 246.2 of this chapter. Each such family shall constitute a separate 
household for FMNP benefit issuance purposes.
    In-kind contributions mean property or services which benefit the 
FMNP and which are contributed by non-Federal parties without charge to 
the FMNP.
    Local agency means any nonprofit entity or local government agency 
which issues FMNP coupons, and provides nutrition education and/or 
information on operational aspects of the FMNP to FMNP recipients.
    Matching requirement means non-Federal outlays in an amount equal to 
not less than 30 percent of the total FMNP costs for the fiscal year. 
The Secretary may negotiate with an Indian State agency a lower 
percentage of matching funds, but not lower than 10 percent of the total 
cost of the program, if the Indian State agency demonstrates to the 
Secretary financial hardship for the affected Indian tribe, band, group, 
or council. The match may be satisfied through non-Federal expenditures 
for the FMNP or for similar farmers' market programs which operate 
during the same period as the FMNP. Similar programs include other 
farmers' market programs which serve low-income women, infants and 
children (who may or may not be WIC participants or on the waiting list 
for WIC services), as well as other categories of low-income recipients, 
such as, but not limited to, low-income elderly persons.
    Nonprofit agency means a private agency which is exempt from income 
tax under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, (26 U.S.C. 1 
et. seq.).
    Nutrition education means individual or group education sessions and 
the provision of information and educational materials designed to 
improve health status, achieve positive change in dietary habits, and 
emphasize relationships between nutrition and health, all in keeping 
with the individual's personal, cultural, and socioeconomic preferences.
    OIG means the Department's Office of the Inspector General.
    Program or FMNP means the WIC Farmers' Market Nutritiona Program 
authorized by section 17(m) of the CNA (42 U.S.C. 1786(m)), as amended 
by Public Law 102-214, the WIC Farmers' Market Nutrition Act of 1992, 
enacted on July 2, 1992. The Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for 
Women, Infants and Children (WIC) is authorized by section 17 of the 
Child Nutrition Act of 1966, as amended. Within section 17, section 
17(m) authorizes the FMNP.
    Recipient means a person chosen by the State agency to receive FMNP 
benefits. Such person must be a woman, infant over 4 months of age, or 
child, who receives benefits under the WIC Program or is on the waiting 
list to receive benefits under the WIC Program.
    SFPD means the Supplemental Food Programs Division of the Food and 
Consumer Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
    Similar programs means other farmers' market projects or programs 
which serve low-income women, infants and children, or other categories 
of recipients, such as, but not limited to, elderly persons.
    State means any of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, the 
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, 
and the Northern Marianas Islands.
    State agency means the agriculture department, the health department 
or any other agency approved by the chief executive officer of the 
State; an Indian tribe, band or group recognized by the Department of 
the Interior; an intertribal council or group which is an authorized 
representative of Indian tribes, bands or groups recognized by the 
Department of the Interior and which has an ongoing relationship with 
such tribes, bands or groups for other purposes and has contracted with 
them to administer the Program; or the appropriate area office of the 
Indian Health Service (IHS), an agency of the Department of Health and 
Human Services.
    State Plan means a plan of FMNP operation and administration that 
describes the manner in which the State agency intends to implement, 
operate and administer all aspects of the FMNP within its jurisdiction 
in accordance with Sec. 248.4.
    Total FMNP costs means the sum of all allowable costs incurred for 
FMNP

[[Page 357]]

purposes, whether funded from the Federal or the State matching share of 
total FMNP funds.
    Total FMNP funds means the sum of the Federal funds provided to the 
State agency and non-Federal contributions provided by the State agency 
for FMNP purposes.
    WIC means the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, 
Infants and Children authorized by section 17 of the Child Nutrition Act 
of 1966, as amended (42 U.S.C. 1771 et. seq.).

[59 FR 11517, Mar. 11, 1994, as amended at 60 FR 49745, Sept. 27, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 248.3  Administration.

    (a) Delegation to FCS. Within the Department, FCS shall act on 
behalf of the Department in the administration of the FMNP. Within FCS, 
SFPD and the FCS Regional Offices are responsible for FMNP 
administration. FCS shall provide assistance to State agencies and 
evaluate all levels of FMNP operations to ensure that the goals of the 
FMNP are achieved in the most effective and efficient manner possible.
    (b) Delegation to State agency. The State agency is responsible for 
the effective and efficient administration of the FMNP in accordance 
with the requirements of this part; the requirements of the Department's 
regulations governing nondiscrimination (7 CFR parts 15, 15a and 15b), 
administration of grants (7 CFR part 3016), nonprocurement debarment/
suspension (7 CFR part 3017), drug-free workplace (7 CFR part 3017), and 
lobbying (7 CFR part 3018); and, Office of Management and Budget 
Circular A-130, FCS guidelines, and Instructions issued under the FCS 
Directives Management System. The State agency shall provide guidance to 
cooperating WIC State and local agencies on all aspects of FMNP 
operations. Pursuant to section 17(m)(2) of the CNA, State agencies may 
operate the FMNP locally through nonprofit organizations or local 
government entities and must ensure coordination among the appropriate 
agencies and organizations.
    (c) Agreement and State Plan. Each State agency desiring to 
administer the FMNP shall annually submit a State Plan and enter into a 
written agreement with the Department for administration of the Program 
in the jurisdiction of the State agency in accordance with the 
provisions of this part.
    (d) State agency ineligibility. A State agency shall be ineligible 
to participate in the FMNP if State or local sales tax is collected on 
Program food purchases in the area in which it administers the Program, 
except that, if sales tax is collected on Program food purchases by 
sovereign Indian entities which are not State agencies, the State agency 
shall remain eligible so long as any farmers' markets collecting such 
tax are disqualified.
    (e) Coordination with WIC agency. The Chief Executive Officer of the 
State shall ensure coordination between the designated administering 
State agency and the WIC State agency, if different, by ensuring that 
the two agencies enter into a written agreement. Such coordination 
between agencies is necessary for the successful operation of the FMNP, 
because WIC participants or persons on the waiting list for WIC services 
are the only persons eligible to receive Federal benefits under the 
FMNP. The written agreement shall delineate the responsibilities of each 
agency, describe any compensation for services, and shall be signed by 
the designated representative of each agency. This agreement shall be 
submitted each year along with the State Plan.
    (f) State staffing standards. Each State agency shall ensure that 
sufficient staff is available to efficiently and effectively administer 
the FMNP. This shall include, but not be limited to, sufficient staff to 
provide nutrition education in coordination with the WIC Program, coupon 
and market management, fiscal reporting, monitoring, and training. The 
State agency shall provide an outline of administrative staff and job 
descriptions for staff whose salaries will be paid from program funds in 
their State Plans.


<R04>
                   Subpart B--State Agency Eligibility


<R05>
Sec. 248.4  State Plan.

    (a) Requirements. By November 15 of each year, each applying or 
participating State agency shall submit to FCS

[[Page 358]]

for approval a State Plan for the following year as a prerequisite to 
receiving funds under this section. The State Plan shall be signed by 
the State designated official responsible for ensuring that the Program 
is operated in accordance with the State Plan. FCS will provide written 
approval or denial of a completed State Plan or amendment within 30 
days. Portions of the State Plan which do not change annually need not 
be resubmitted. However, the State agency shall provide the title of the 
sections that remain unchanged, as well as the year of the last Plan in 
which the sections were submitted. At a minimum, the Plan must address 
the following areas in sufficient detail to demonstrate the State 
agency's ability to meet the requirements of the FMNP:
    (1) A copy of the agreement between the designated administering 
State agency and the WIC State agency, if different, for services such 
as nutrition education, and documentation of coordinated efforts as 
required in Sec. 248.3(e), as well as copies of agreements with agencies 
other than the WIC State agency.
    (2) Estimated number of recipients for the fiscal year, and proposed 
months of operation.
    (3) Estimated cost of the FMNP, including a minimum amount necessary 
to operate the FMNP.
    (4) Description of how the Program will achieve its dual purposes of 
providing a nutritional benefit to WIC (or waiting list) participants 
and expanding the awareness and use of farmers' markets.
    (5) Outline of administrative staff and job descriptions.
    (6) Detailed description of the recordkeeping system including, but 
not limited to, the system for maintaining records pertaining to 
financial operations, coupon issuance and redemption, and FMNP 
participation.
    (7) Detailed description of the financial management system, 
including, but not limited to documentation of how the State will meet 
the matching requirement and procedures for obligating funds.
    (8) Detailed description of the service area including:
    (i) The number and addresses of participating markets, farmstands 
and area WIC clinics including a map outlining the service area and 
proximity of markets/farmstands to clinics; and
    (ii) Estimated number of WIC participants and persons on the WIC 
waiting list that will receive FMNP coupons.
    (9) Description of the coupon issuance system including:
    (i) How the State agency will target areas with highest 
concentrations of eligible persons and greatest access to farmers' 
markets within the broadest possible geographic area;
    (ii) Annual benefit amount per recipient;
    (iii) Method for instructing recipients on the proper use of FMNP 
coupons and the purpose of the FMNP; and
    (iv) Method for ensuring that FMNP coupons are only issued to 
eligible recipients.
    (10) Detailed description of the coupon and farmers' market 
management system including:
    (i) criteria for authorizing farmers' markets;
    (ii) For those State agencies desiring to authorize farmstands, 
justification for doing so.
    (iii) Procedures for training farmers and market managers, at 
authorization, and annually thereafter;
    (iv) Procedures for monitoring farmers' markets;
    (v) Description of system for identifying high risk farmers and 
farmers' markets and procedures for sanctioning farmers and farmers' 
markets;
    (vi) Facsimile of the FMNP coupon;
    (vii) Identification of the fresh, nutritious, unprepared fruits, 
vegetables, and herbs which are eligible for purchase under the Program;
    (viii) Description of FMNP coupon replacement policy;
    (ix) Procedures for handling recipient and farmer/farmers' market 
complaints.
    (11) Detailed description of the FMNP coupon redemption process 
including:
    (i) Procedures for ensuring the secure transportation and storage of 
FMNP coupons;
    (ii) System for identifying and reconciling FMNP coupons;
    (iii) Timeframes for FMNP coupon redemption by recipients; 
submission for payment by markets, and payment by the State agency;

[[Page 359]]

    (12) System for ensuring that FMNP coupons are redeemed only by 
authorized farmers/farmers' markets and only for eligible foods.
    (13) System for identifying FMNP coupons which are redeemed or 
submitted for payment outside valid dates or by unauthorized farmers/
farmers' markets.
    (14) A copy of the written agreement to be used between the State 
agency and authorized farmers/farmers' markets. In those States which 
authorize farmers' markets, but not individual farmers, this agreement 
shall specify in detail the role of and procedures to be used by 
farmers' markets for monitoring and sanctioning farmers, and the 
appropriate procedures to be used by a farmer to appeal a sanction or 
disqualification imposed by a farmers' market.
    (15) If available, information on the change in consumption of fresh 
fruits and vegetables by recipients. This information shall be submitted 
as an addendum to the State Plan and shall be submitted at such a date 
specified by the Secretary.
    (16) If available, information on the effects of the program on 
farmers' markets. This information shall be submitted as an addendum to 
the State Plan and shall be submitted at such a date specified by the 
Secretary.
    (17) A description of the procedures the State agency will use to 
comply with the civil rights requirements described in Sec. 248.7(a), 
including the processing of discrimination complaints.
    (18) State agencies which have not previously participated in the 
FMNP, shall provide the following additional information:
    (i) A statement assuring that if the State agency receives Federal 
funds, as specified under Sec. 248.14 to operate the FMNP, and applies 
those funds to similar programs operated in the previous fiscal year 
with State or local funds, the amount of State and local funds that were 
available to similar programs in the fiscal year preceding the first 
year of operation shall not be reduced. The State agency shall include 
data in the State Plan showing that it did not reduce the amount of 
State and local funds available to the similar program in the preceding 
fiscal year.
    (ii) A capability statement which includes a summary description of 
any prior experience with farmers' market projects or programs, 
including information and data describing the attributes of such 
projects or programs.
    (19) For States making expansion requests, documentation which meets 
the following requirements:
    (i) Justifies the need for an increase in participation;
    (ii) Demonstrates the State agency's ability to satisfactorily 
operate the existing FMNP;
    (iii) Identifies the management capabilities of the State to expand.
    (20) For those State agencies requesting the extra 2 percent 
administrative rate for market development or technical assistance to 
promote such development in disadvantaged areas or remote rural areas, 
an explanation of their justification and plans for the use of such 
funds.
    (b) Amendments. At any time after approval, the State agency may 
amend the State Plan to reflect changes. The State agency shall submit 
the amendments to FCS for approval. The amendments shall be signed by 
the State designated official responsible for ensuring that the FMNP is 
operated in accordance with the State Plan.
    (c) Retention of copy. A copy of the approved State Plan shall be 
kept on file at the State agency for public inspection.

[59 FR 11517, Mar. 11, 1994, as amended at 60 FR 49746, Sept. 27, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 248.5  Selection of new State agencies.

    In selecting new State agencies, the Department shall rank State 
Plans submitted in accordance with Sec. 248.4, using the following 
criteria in making this ranking:
    (a) Prior experience of the State with the demonstration project or 
similar farmers' market programs;
    (b) Prior operation, by the State of a similar program with State or 
local funds and ability to present data concerning the beneficial 
attributes of such program;
    (c) Emphasis on service to areas in the State that have:
    (1) The highest concentration of eligible persons;

[[Page 360]]

    (2) The greatest access to farmers' markets;
    (3) Broad geographic areas;
    (4) The greatest number of recipients in the broadest geographical 
area within the State; and
    (5) Any other characteristics the Department determines that 
maximize the availability of benefits to eligible persons.
    (d) Consideration of the amount of funds necessary to successfully 
operate the FMNP in the State compared with other States and with the 
total amount of funds available to the FMNP.
    (e) Approval of a State Plan does not equate to an obligation on the 
part of the Secretary to fund the FMNP within that State.


<R04>
                    Subpart C--Recipient Eligibility


<R05>
Sec. 248.6  Recipient eligibility.

    (a) Eligibility for certification. Individuals who are eligible to 
receive Federal benefits under the FMNP are those, excluding infants 4 
months of age or younger, who are currently receiving benefits under WIC 
or who are on the waiting list to receive benefits from WIC.
    (b) Limitations on certification. If necessary to limit the number 
of recipients, State agencies may impose additional eligibility 
requirements, such as limiting participant certification to certain 
geographic areas, or to high priority WIC participants such as pregnant 
and breastfeeding women. States may also preclude groups of low priority 
persons, such as persons on the waiting list for WIC. Each State agency 
must specifically identify these limitations on certification in its 
State Plan.
    (c) Recipient or household benefit allocation. On a Statewide basis, 
State agencies shall elect to allocate and issue benefits either to 
recipients or households. A State agency allocating benefits on a 
household basis shall not issue more benefits to a household than it 
otherwise would if benefits were allocated to individual recipients 
within the household. For those State agencies issuing FMNP benefits on 
a household basis, each family as defined in Sec. 246.2 of this chapter 
shall constitute a separate household. Foods provided, regardless of 
method of issuance, are intended for the sole benefit of FMNP recipients 
and are not intended to be shared with other non-participating household 
members. If a State agency issues benefits on a household basis, data 
concerning number and type of recipients must still be provided as 
required by Sec. 248.23(b). Recipients shall receive FMNP benefits free 
of charge.


<R05>
Sec. 248.7  Nondiscrimination.

    (a) Civil rights requirements. The State agency shall comply with 
the requirements of title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, title IX 
of the Education Amendments of 1972, section 504 of the Rehabilitation 
Act of 1973, the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, Department of 
Agriculture regulations on nondiscrimination (7 CFR parts 15, 15a and 
15b), and applicable FCS Instructions to ensure that no person shall, on 
the grounds of race, color, national origin, age, sex or handicap, be 
excluded from participation, be denied benefits, or be otherwise 
subjected to discrimination, under the FMNP. Because racial and ethnic 
participation data (as required by title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 
1964) are collected at the time women, infants, and children are 
certified for participation in the WIC Program, the Department has 
determined that the WIC data collection effort is sufficient to fulfill 
the racial/ethnic data collection requirement for the FMNP. Therefore, 
no additional data collection is required. Compliance with title VI of 
the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title IX of the Education Amendments of 
1972, section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, the Age 
Discrimination Act of 1975, and regulations and instructions issued 
thereunder shall include, but not be limited to:
    (1) Notification to the public of the nondiscrimination policy and 
complaint rights of recipients and potentially eligible persons, which 
may be satisfied through the Department's required nondiscrimination 
statement on brochures and publications;
    (2) Review and monitoring activity to ensure FMNP compliance with 
the nondiscrimination laws and regulations;
    (3) Establishment of grievance procedures for handling recipient 
complaints based on sex and handicap.

[[Page 361]]

    (b) Complaints. Persons seeking to file discrimination complaints 
may file them either with the Secretary of Agriculture, or the Director, 
Office of Equal Opportunity, USDA, Washington, DC 20250 or with the 
office established by the State agency to handle discrimination 
grievances or complaints. All complaints received by State agencies 
which allege discrimination based on race, color, national origin, or 
age shall be referred to the Secretary of Agriculture or the Director of 
the Office of Equal Opportunity, USDA. A State agency may process 
complaints which allege discrimination based on sex or handicap if 
grievance procedures are in place.


<R04>
                      Subpart D--Recipient Benefits


<R05>
Sec. 248.8  Level of benefits and eligible foods.

    (a) General. State agencies shall identify in the State Plan the 
fresh, nutritious, unprepared, locally grown fruits, vegetables and 
herbs which are eligible for purchase under the FMNP. Ineligible foods 
for the purpose of the FMNP include, but are not limited to: honey, 
maple syrup, cider, nuts and seeds, eggs, cheese, meat and seafood. 
Locally grown shall mean produce grown only within a State's borders but 
may be defined to include border areas in adjacent States. Under no 
circumstances can produce grown outside of the United States and its 
territories be considered eligible foods.
    (b) The value of the Federal benefits received. The value of the 
Federal share of the FMNP benefits received by each recipient, or by 
each family within a household in those States which elect to issue 
benefits on a household basis under Sec. 248.6(c) may not be less than 
$10 per year or more than $20 per year.

[59 FR 11517, Mar. 11, 1994, as amended at 60 FR 49746, Sept. 27, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 248.9  Nutrition education.

    (a) Goals. Nutrition education shall emphasize the relationship of 
proper nutrition to the total concept of good health, including the 
importance of consuming fresh fruits and vegetables.
    (b) Requirement. The State agency shall integrate nutrition 
education into FMNP operations and may satisfy nutrition education 
requirements through coordination with other agencies within the State. 
Such other agencies may include the WIC Program which routinely offers 
nutrition education to participants and which may wish to use the 
opportunity of the FMNP to reinforce nutrition messages. State agencies 
wishing to coordinate nutrition education with WIC shall enter into a 
written cooperative agreement with WIC agencies to offer nutrition 
education relevant to the use and nutritional value of foods available 
to FMNP recipients. In cases where relevant WIC nutrition education 
sessions are used to meet this requirement, reimbursement to the WIC 
local agency shall not be permitted. In cases where FMNP recipients are 
not receiving relevant nutrition education from the WIC Program, the 
State agency shall arrange alternative methods for the provision of such 
nutrition education which is an allowable cost under the FMNP.


<R04>
                   Subpart E--State Agency Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 248.10  Coupon and market management.

    (a) General. This section sets forth State agency responsibilities 
regarding the authorization of farmers/farmers' markets. The State 
agency is responsible for the fiscal management of, and accountability 
for FMNP-related activities for farmers/farmers' markets. Each State 
agency may decide whether to authorize farmers individually, farmers' 
markets, or both farmers and farmers' markets. All contracts or 
agreements entered into by the State agency for the management or 
operation of farmers/farmers' markets shall conform with the 
requirements of 7 CFR part 3016, Uniform Administrative Requirements for 
Grants and Cooperative Agreements to State and Local Governments.
    (1) Only farmers' markets authorized by the State agency may redeem 
FMNP coupons. Only farmers authorized by the State agency or that have a 
valid agreement with an authorized farmers' market, may redeem coupons.

[[Page 362]]

    (2) The State agency shall establish criteria for the authorization 
of individual farmers and/or farmers' markets. Any authorized farmer/
farmers' market must agree to sell recipients only those foods 
identified as eligible by the State agency, in exchange for FMNP 
coupons. Individuals who exclusively sell produce grown by someone else, 
such as wholesale distributors, cannot be authorized to participate in 
the FMNP, except individuals employed by a farmer otherwise qualified 
under these regulations, or individuals hired by a nonprofit 
organization to sell produce at urban farmstands on behalf of local 
farmers.
    (3) The State agency shall ensure that an appropriate number of 
farmers/farmers' markets are authorized for adequate recipient 
convenience and access in the area(s) proposed to be served and for 
effective management of the farmers/farmers' markets by the State 
agency. The State agency may establish criteria to limit the number of 
authorized farmers/farmers' markets.
    (4) The State agency shall ensure that face-to-face training is 
conducted prior to start up of the first year of FMNP participation of a 
farmers' market and individual farmer. The face-to-face training shall 
include at a minimum those items listed in paragraph (d) of this 
section.
    (5) Authorized farmers shall display a sign stating that they are 
authorized to redeem FMNP coupons.
    (6) Authorized farmers/farmers' markets shall comply with the 
requirements of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, title IX of 
the Education Amendments of 1972, section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act 
of 1973, the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, Department of Agriculture 
regulations on nondiscrimination (7 CFR parts 15, 15a and 15b), and FCS 
Instructions as outlined in Sec. 248.7.
    (7) The State agency shall ensure that there is no conflict of 
interest between the State or local agency and any participating farmer/
farmers' market.
    (b) Farmers' market agreements. The State agency shall ensure that 
all participating farmers' markets enter into written agreements with 
the State agency. State agencies which authorize individual farmers 
shall also enter into written agreements with the individual farmers. 
The agreement shall be signed by a representative who has legal 
authority to obligate the farmers/farmers' market. Agreements shall 
include a description of sanctions for noncompliance with FMNP 
requirements and shall contain at a minimum, the following 
specifications, although the State agency may determine the exact 
wording to be used:
    (1) The farmer/farmers' market shall:
    (i) Provide such information as the State agency may require for its 
periodic reports to FCS;
    (ii) Assure that FMNP coupons are redeemed only for eligible foods;
    (iii) Provide eligible foods at the current price or less than the 
current price charged to other customers;
    (iv) Accept FMNP coupons within the dates of their validity and 
submit such coupons for payment within the allowable time period 
established by the State agency;
    (v) In accordance with a procedure established by the State agency, 
mark each transacted coupon with a farmer identifier. In those cases 
where the agreement is between the State agency and the farmer, each 
transacted FMNP coupon shall contain a farmer identifier and shall be 
batched for reimbursement under that identifier. In those cases where 
the agreement is between the State agency and the farmers' market, each 
transacted FMNP coupon shall contain a farmer identifier and be batched 
for reimbursement under a farmers' market identifier.
    (vi) Accept training on FMNP procedures and provide training to 
farmers and any employees with FMNP responsibilities on such procedures;
    (vii) Agree to be monitored for compliance with FMNP requirements, 
including both overt and covert monitoring;
    (viii) Be accountable for actions of farmers or employees in the 
provision of foods and related activities;
    (ix) Pay the State agency for any coupons transacted in violation of 
this agreement;
    (x) Offer FMNP recipients the same courtesies as other customers;

[[Page 363]]

    (xi) Comply with the nondiscrimination provisions of USDA 
regulations as provided in Sec. 248.7; and
    (xii) Notify the State agency if any farmer or farmers' market 
ceases operation prior to the end of the authorization period.
    (2) The farmers' market/farmer shall not:
    (i) Collect sales tax on FMNP coupon purchases;
    (ii) Seek restitution from FMNP recipients for coupons not paid by 
the State agency;
    (iii) Issue cash change for purchases that are in an amount less 
than the value of the FMNP coupon(s).
    (3) Neither the State agency nor the farmer/farmers' market has an 
obligation to renew the agreement. Either the State agency or the 
farmer/farmers' market may terminate the agreement for cause after 
providing advance written notification.
    (4) The State agency may deny payment to the farmer/farmers' market 
for improperly redeemed FMNP coupons and may demand refunds for payments 
already made on improperly redeemed coupons.
    (5) The State agency may disqualify a farmer/farmers' market for 
FMNP abuse. The farmer/farmers' market has the right to appeal a denial 
of an application to participate, a disqualification, or a FMNP sanction 
by the State agency. Expiration of a contract or agreement with a 
farmer/farmers' market, and claims actions under Sec. 248.20, are not 
appealable.
    (6) A farmer or farmers' market which commits fraud or engages in 
other illegal activity is liable to prosecution under applicable 
Federal, State or local laws.
    (7) Agreements may not exceed 3 years.
    (c) Farmer agreements for State agencies which do not authorize 
farmers. Those State agencies which authorize farmers' markets but not 
individual farmers shall require authorized farmers' markets to enter 
into a written agreement with each farmer within the market that is 
participating in FMNP. The State agency shall set forth the required 
terms for the agreement and provide a sample agreement which may be 
used.
    (d) Annual training for farmers/farmers' market managers. State 
agencies shall conduct annual training for farmers/farmers' market 
managers participating in the FMNP. The State agency shall conduct a 
face-to-face training for all farmers and farmers' market managers who 
have never previously participated in the program prior to their 
commencing participation in the FMNP. After a farmer/farmers' market 
manager's first year of FMNP operation, State agencies have discretion 
in determining the method used for annual training purposes. At a 
minimum, annual training shall include instruction emphasizing:
    (1) Eligible food choices;
    (2) Proper FMNP coupon redemption procedures, including deadlines 
for submission of coupons for payment;
    (3) Equitable treatment of FMNP recipients, including the 
availability of produce to FMNP recipients that is of the same quality 
and cost as that sold to other customers;
    (4) Civil rights compliance and guidelines;
    (5) Guidelines for storing FMNP coupons safely; and
    (6) Guidelines for cancelling FMNP coupons, such as punching holes 
or rubber stamping.
    (e) Monitoring and review of farmers/farmers' markets and local 
agencies. The State agency shall be responsible for the monitoring of 
farmers/farmers' markets, and local agencies within its jurisdiction. 
This shall include developing a system for identifying high risk 
farmers/farmers' markets and ensuring on-site monitoring, conducting 
further investigation, and sanctioning of such farmers/farmers' markets 
as appropriate.
    (1) Where coupon reimbursement responsibilities are delegated to 
farmers' market managers, farmers' market associations, or nonprofit 
organizations, the State agency may establish bonding requirements for 
these entities. Costs of such bonding are not reimbursable 
administrative expenses.
    (2) Each State agency shall rank participating farmers and farmers' 
markets by risk factors, and shall conduct annual, on-site monitoring of 
at least 10 percent of farmers and 10 percent of farmers' markets which 
shall include

[[Page 364]]

those farmers and markets identified as being the highest-risk. 
Mandatory high-risk indicators are a proportionately high volume of FMNP 
coupons redeemed by a farmer as compared to other farmers within the 
farmers' market and within the State, recipient complaints, and farmers 
and farmers' markets in their first year of FMNP operation. States are 
encouraged to formally establish other high risk indicators for 
identifying potential problems. If additional high risk indicators are 
established, they shall be set forth in the farmers/farmers' market 
agreement and in the State Plan. If application of the high-risk 
indicators results in fewer than 10 percent of farmers and farmers' 
markets as high-risk, the State agency shall randomly select additional 
farmers and farmers' markets to be monitored in order to meet the 10 
percent minimum. The high-risk indicators listed above generally apply 
to a State agency already participating in the FMNP. A State agency 
participating in the FMNP for the first time shall, in lieu of applying 
the high-risk indicators, randomly select 10 percent of its 
participating farmers and 10 percent of its participating farmers' 
markets for monitoring visits.
    (3) The following shall be documented for all on-site farmers and 
farmers' markets monitoring visits, at a minimum: Names of both farmer/
farmers' market and reviewer; date of review; nature of problem(s) 
detected or the observation that the farmer/farmers' market appears to 
be in compliance with FMNP requirements; record of interviews with 
recipients, market managers and/or farmers; and signature of the 
reviewer. Reviewers are not required to notify the farmer/farmers' 
market of the monitoring visit during, or immediately after the visit. 
The State agency shall do so after a reasonable delay when necessary to 
protect the identity of the reviewer(s) or the integrity of the 
investigation. After the farmer/farmers' market has been informed of any 
deficiencies detected by the monitoring visit, and instances where the 
farmer/farmers' market will be permitted to continue participation, the 
farmer/farmers' market shall provide plans as to how the deficiencies 
will be corrected.
    (4) At least every 2 years, the State agency shall review all local 
agencies within its jurisdiction. WIC State agency reviews of WIC local 
agencies, which include reviews of FMNP practices, may contribute to 
meeting the requirement that all local agencies be reviewed once every 2 
years.
    (f) Control of FMNP coupons. (1) The State agency shall control and 
provide accountability for the receipt and issuance of FMNP coupons.
    (2) The State agency shall ensure that there is secure 
transportation and storage of unissued FMNP coupons.
    (3) The State agency shall design and implement a system of review 
of FMNP coupons to detect errors. At a minimum, the errors the system 
must detect are a missing recipient signature, a missing farmer and/or 
market identification, and redemption by a farmer outside of the valid 
date. The State agency shall implement procedures to reduce the number 
of errors in transactions, where possible.
    (g) Payment to farmers/farmers' markets. The State agency shall 
ensure that farmers/ farmers' markets are promptly paid for food costs.
    (h) Reconciliation of FMNP coupons. The State agency shall identify 
the disposition of all FMNP coupons as validly redeemed, lost or stolen, 
expired, or not matching issuance records. Validly redeemed FMNP coupons 
are those that are issued to a valid recipient and redeemed by an 
authorized farmers/farmers' market within valid dates. FMNP coupons that 
were redeemed but cannot be traced to a valid recipient or authorized 
farmer/farmers' market shall be subject to claims action in accordance 
with Sec. 248.20. (1) If the State agency elects to replace lost, stolen 
or damaged FMNP coupons, it must describe its system for doing so in the 
State Plan.
    (2) The State agency shall use uniform FMNP coupons within its 
jurisdiction.
    (3) FMNP coupons must include, at a minimum, the following 
information:
    (i) The last date by which the recipient may use the coupon. This 
date shall be no later than November 30 of each year.

[[Page 365]]

    (ii) A date by which the farmer or farmers' market must submit the 
coupon for payment. When establishing this date, State agencies shall 
take into consideration the date financial statements are due to the 
FCS, and allow time for the corresponding coupon reconciliation that 
must be done by the State agency prior to submission of financial 
statements. Currently, financial statements are due to FCS by January 
30.
    (iii) A unique and sequential serial number.
    (iv) A denomination (dollar amount).
    (v) A farmer identifier for the redeeming farmer when agreements are 
between the State agency and the farmer.
    (vi) In those instances where State agencies have agreements with 
farmers' markets, there must be a farmer identifier on each coupon and a 
market identifier on the cover of coupons which are batched by the 
market manager for reimbursement.
    (i) Instructions to recipients. Each recipient shall receive 
instructions on the proper use and redemption of the FMNP coupons, 
including, but not limited to: (1) A list of names and addresses of 
authorized farmers/farmers' markets at which FMNP coupons may be 
redeemed.
    (2) A description of eligible foods and the prohibition against cash 
change.
    (3) An explanation of their right to complain about improper farmer/
farmers' market practices with regard to FMNP responsibilities and the 
process for doing so.
    (j) Recipients and farmer/farmers' market complaints. The State 
agency shall have procedures which document the handling of complaints 
by recipients and farmers/farmers' markets. Complaints of civil rights 
discrimination shall be handled in accordance with Sec. 248.7(b).
    (k) Recipients and farmer/farmers' market sanctions. The State 
agency shall establish policies which determine the type and level of 
sanctions to be applied against recipients and farmers/farmers' markets, 
based upon the severity and nature of the FMNP violations observed, and 
such other factors as the State agency determines appropriate, such as 
whether repeated offenses have occurred over a period of time. Farmers/
farmers' markets may be sanctioned, disqualified, or both, when 
appropriate. Sanctions may include fines for improper FMNP coupon 
redemption procedures and the penalties outlined in Sec. 248.20, in case 
of deliberate fraud. In those instances where compliance purchases are 
conducted, the results of covert compliance purchases can be a basis for 
farmer/farmers' market sanctions. A farmer/farmers' market committing 
fraud or other unlawful activities is liable to prosecution under 
applicable Federal, State or local laws. State agency policies shall 
ensure that a farmer that is disqualified from the FMNP at one market 
shall not participate in the FMNP at any other farmers' market in the 
State's jurisdiction during the disqualification period.

[59 FR 11517, Mar. 11, 1994, as amended at 60 FR 49746, Sept. 27, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 248.11  Financial management system.

    (a) Disclosure of expenditures. The State agency shall maintain a 
financial management system which provides accurate, current and 
complete disclosure of the financial status of the FMNP. This shall 
include an accounting for all property and other assets and all FMNP 
funds received and expended each fiscal year.
    (b) Internal controls. The State agency shall maintain effective 
controls over and accountability for all FMNP funds. The State agency 
must have effective internal controls to ensure that expenditures 
financed with FMNP funds are authorized and properly chargeable to the 
FMNP.
    (c) Record of expenditures. The State agency shall maintain records 
which adequately identify the source and use of funds expended for FMNP 
activities. These records shall contain, but are not limited to, 
information pertaining to authorization, receipt of funds, obligations, 
unobligated balances, assets, liabilities, outlays, and income.
    (d) Payment of costs. The State agency shall implement procedures 
which ensure prompt and accurate payment of allowable costs, and ensure 
the allowability and allocability of costs in accordance with the cost 
principles and standard provisions of this part, 7 CFR

[[Page 366]]

part 3016, and FCS guidelines and Instructions.
    (e) Identification of obligated funds. The State agency shall 
implement procedures which accurately identify obligated FMNP funds at 
the time the obligations are made.
    (f) Resolution of audit findings. The State agency shall implement 
procedures which ensure timely and appropriate resolution of claims and 
other matters resulting from audit findings and recommendations.
    (g) Reconciliation of food instruments. The State agency shall 
reconcile FMNP coupons in accordance with Sec. 248.10(h).
    (h) Transfer of cash. The State agency shall establish the timing 
and amounts of its cash draws against its Letter of Credit in accordance 
with 31 CFR part 205.

[59 FR 11517, Mar. 11, 1994, as amended at 60 FR 49747, Sept. 27, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 248.12  FMNP costs.

    (a) General.--(1) Composition of allowable costs. In general, a cost 
item will be deemed allowable if it is reasonable and necessary for FMNP 
purposes and otherwise satisfies allowability criteria set forth in 7 
CFR 3016.22 and this part. FMNP purposes include the administration and 
operation of the FMNP. Program costs supported by State matching 
contributions must meet the same criteria for allowability as costs 
supported by Federal funds. Allowable FMNP costs may be classified as 
follows:
    (i) Food costs and administrative costs. Food costs are the costs of 
food benefits provided to FMNP recipients. Administrative costs are the 
costs associated with providing FMNP benefits and services to recipients 
and generally administering the FMNP. Specific examples of allowable 
administrative costs are listed in paragraph (b) of this section. Except 
as provided in Sec. 248.14(g) of this part, a State agency's 
administrative costs under the FMNP may not exceed 17 percent of its 
total FMNP costs. Any costs incurred for food and/or administration 
above the Federal grant level will be the State agency's responsibility.
    (ii) Market development or technical assistance costs. Market 
development or technical assistance costs are those costs under 
Sec. 248.14(h) incurred to promote the development of farmers' markets 
in socially or economically disadvantaged areas, or remote rural areas, 
where individuals eligible for participation in the program have limited 
access to locally grown fruits and vegetables. Subject to a 
determination by the Secretary under Sec. 248.14(h), a State agency may, 
during any fiscal year, use not more than 2 percent of total program 
funds for such market development or technical assistance.
    (iii) Direct and indirect costs. Direct costs are food and 
administrative costs incurred specifically for the FMNP. Indirect costs 
are administrative costs that benefit multiple programs or activities, 
and cannot be identified to any one without effort disproportionate to 
the results achieved. In accordance with the provisions of 7 CFR part 
3016, a claim for reimbursement of indirect costs shall be supported by 
an approved allocation plan for the determination of such costs. An 
indirect cost rate developed through such an allocation plan may not be 
applied to a base that includes food costs.
    (2) Costs allowable with prior approval. A State or local agency 
must obtain prior approval in accordance with 7 CFR 3016.22 before 
charging to the FMNP any capital expenditures and other cost items 
designated by 7 CFR 3016.22 as requiring such approval.
    (3) Unallowable costs. Costs that are not reasonable and necessary 
for FMNP purposes, or that do not otherwise satisfy the cost principles 
of 7 CFR 3016.22, are unallowable. Notwithstanding any other provision 
of part 3016 or this part, the cost of constructing or operating a 
farmers' market is unallowable. Unallowable costs may never be claimed 
for Federal reimbursement or counted toward the State matching 
requirement.
    (b) Specified allowable administrative costs. Allowable 
administrative costs include the following:
    (1) The costs associated with the provision of nutrition education 
which meets the requirements of Sec. 248.9 of this part.
    (2) The costs of FMNP coupon issuance, or recipient education 
covering proper coupon redemption procedures.

[[Page 367]]

    (3) The cost of outreach services.
    (4) The costs associated with the food delivery process, such as 
printing FMNP coupons, processing redeemed coupons, and training market 
managers on the food delivery system.
    (5) The cost of monitoring and reviewing Program operations.
    (6) The cost of FMNP training.
    (7) The cost of required reporting and recordkeeping.
    (8) The cost of determining which local WIC sites will be utilized.
    (9) The cost of recruiting and authorizing farmers/farmers' markets 
to participate in the FMNP.
    (10) The cost of preparing contracts for farmers/farmers' markets 
and local WIC providers.
    (11) The cost of developing a data processing system for redemption 
and reconciliation of FMNP coupons.
    (12) The cost of designing program training and informational 
materials.
    (13) The cost of coordinating FMNP implementation responsibilities 
between designated administering agencies.

[59 FR 11517, Mar. 11, 1994, as amended at 60 FR 49747, Sept. 27, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 248.13  FMNP income.

    Program income means gross income the State agency earns from grant 
supported activities. It includes fees for services performed and 
receipts from the use or rental of real or personal property acquired 
with Federal grant funds, but does not include proceeds from the 
disposition of such property. The State agency shall retain Program 
income earned during the agreement period and use it for Program 
purposes in accordance with the addition method described in 7 CFR 
3016.25(g)(2). Fines, penalties or assessments paid by local agencies or 
farmers/farmers' markets are also deemed to be FMNP income. The State 
agency shall ensure that the sources and applications of Program income 
are fully documented.


<R05>
Sec. 248.14  Distribution of funds.

    (a) Conditions for receipt of Federal funds.--(1) Matching of 
funds--(i) Match amount. As a prerequisite to the receipt of Federal 
funds, a State agency must agree to contribute from non-Federal sources 
at least 30 percent of its total FMNP cost. The Secretary may negotiate 
a lower percentage of matching funds, but not lower than 10 percent of 
the total cost of the program, in the case of an Indian State agency 
that demonstrates to the Secretary financial hardship for the affected 
Indian tribe, band, group, or council. The State agency may contribute 
more than this minimum amount. Non-federal contributions for similar 
programs as defined in Sec. 248.2 may satisfy the State matching 
requirement. If a State receiving funds under the FMNP applies the 
Federal grant to a similar program operated in the previous fiscal year 
solely with State or local funds, the State shall not reduce in any 
fiscal year the amount of State or local funds made available to the 
similar program below the level at which the similar program was funded 
in the year prior to obtaining FMNP funding.
    (ii) Sources of matching contributions. A State agency may count any 
form of contribution authorized by 7 CFR 3016.24 toward the State 
matching requirement including in-kind contributions.
    (iii) Failure to match. A State agency's failure to meet the State 
matching requirement will result in the establishment of a claim for the 
amount of Federal grant funds not matched. The matching requirement will 
be considered satisfied if State or other non-Federal matching 
contributions reported on the final closeout report required by 
Sec. 248.15(a) of this part amount to at least 30 percent of the total 
FMNP costs. This match amount may be lower for those Indian State 
agencies that have demonstrated to the Secretary financial hardship as 
set forth in paragraph (a)(1)(i) of this section.
    (2) State Plan and agreement. A State agency shall have its State 
Plan approved and shall execute an agreement with the Department in 
accordance with Sec. 248.3(c) of this part.
    (b) Distribution of FMNP funds to previously participating State 
agencies. Provided that sufficient FMNP funds are available, each State 
agency that participated in the FMNP in any prior fiscal year, shall 
receive not less than the amount of funds the State agency received in 
the most recent fiscal year in

[[Page 368]]

which it received funding, if it otherwise complies with the 
requirements established in this part.
    (c) Ratable reduction. If amounts appropriated for any fiscal year 
for grants under the FMNP are not sufficient to pay to each previously 
participating State agency at least an amount as identified in paragraph 
(b) of this section, each State agency's grant shall be ratably reduced, 
except that, to the extent permitted by available funds, each State 
agency shall receive at least $75,000 or the amount that the State 
agency received for the most recent prior fiscal year in which the State 
participated, if that amount is less than $75,000.
    (d) Expansion of participating State agencies and establishment of 
new State agencies. Any FMNP funds remaining for allocation after 
meeting the requirements of paragraph (b) of this section shall be 
allocated in the following manner:
    (1) Of the remaining funds, 75 percent shall be made available to 
State agencies already participating in the FMNP that wish to serve 
additional recipients. If this amount is greater than that necessary to 
satisfy all State plans approved for additional recipients, the 
unallocated amount shall be applied toward satisfying any unmet need in 
paragraph (d)(2) of this section.
    (2) Of the remaining funds, 25 percent shall be made available to 
State agencies that have not participated in the FMNP in any prior 
fiscal year. If this amount is greater than that necessary to satisfy 
the approved State Plans for new States, the unallocated amount shall be 
applied toward satisfying any unmet need in paragraph (d)(1) of this 
section. The Department reserves the right not to fund every State 
agency with an approved State Plan.
    (3) In any fiscal year, any FMNP funds that remain unallocated after 
satisfying the requirements of paragraphs (d)(1) and (d)(2) of this 
section, shall be reallocated in accordance with paragraph (k) of this 
section.
    (e) Expansion for current State agencies. In providing funds to 
serve additional recipients in State agencies that participated in the 
FMNP in the previous fiscal year, the Department shall consider on a 
case-by-case basis, the following:
    (1) Whether a State agency utilized at least 80 percent of its prior 
year food grant. States that did not spend at least 80 percent of their 
prior year food grant, may still be eligible for expansion funding if, 
in the judgment of the Department, good cause existed which was beyond 
the management control of the State, such as severe weather conditions, 
or unanticipated decreases in participant caseload in the WIC Program.
    (2) Documentation that justifies the need for an increase in 
participation. This documentation must be set forth in the State Plan as 
outlined in Sec. 248.4(a)(20).
    (3) Demonstrated ability to satisfactorily operate the existing 
FMNP. Supporting documentation must be set forth in the State Plan as 
outlined in Sec. 248.4(a)(20).
    (4) Documentation that identifies the management capabilities of the 
State to expand. This documentation must be set forth in the State Plan 
as outlined in Sec. 248.4(a)(20).
    (f) Funding of new State agencies. Funds will be awarded to new 
State agencies in accordance with Sec. 248.5.
    (g) Administrative funding. A State agency shall have available for 
administrative costs an amount not greater than 17 percent of total FMNP 
funds. The 17 percent administrative cost limitation shall not apply to 
any funds that a State agency may contribute in excess of its minimum 
matching requirement. A State agency may use any non-Federal 
contributions in excess of the 30 percent (or the negotiated percentage 
for those Indian State agencies that received a lower amount) matching 
requirement for food and/or administrative costs.
    (h) Market development. A State agency shall be permitted to use not 
more than 2 percent of total program funds for market development or 
technical assistance to farmers' markets if the Secretary determines 
that the State intends to promote the development of farmers' markets in 
socially or economically disadvantaged areas, or remote rural areas, 
where individuals eligible for participation in the program

[[Page 369]]

have limited access to locally grown fruits and vegetables.
    (i) Transfer of funds. A State agency may use not more than 5 
percent of the Federal FMNP funds made available for the fiscal year to 
reimburse expenses incurred by the FMNP during a preceding fiscal year. 
The State agency shall provide such justification for its request to 
spend back funds under this paragraph as FCS may require.
    (j) Recovery of unused funds. State agencies shall return to FCS any 
unexpended funds made available for a fiscal year by February 1 of the 
following fiscal year.
    (k) Reallocation of funds. Any funds recovered under paragraphs 
(d)(3) and (j) of this section will be reallocated in accordance with 
the appropriate method determined by FCS.

[59 FR 11517, Mar. 11, 1994, as amended at 60 FR 49747, Sept. 27, 1995; 
60 FR 57148, Nov. 14, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 248.15  Closeout procedures.

    (a) General. State agencies shall submit to FCS a final closeout 
report for the fiscal year on a form prescribed by FCS on a date 
specified by FCS.
    (b) Grant closeout procedures. When grants to State agencies are 
terminated, the following procedures shall be performed in accordance 
with 7 CFR part 3016.
    (1) FCS may disqualify a State agency's participation under the 
FMNP, in whole or in part, or take such remedies as may be appropriate, 
whenever FCS determines that the State agency failed to comply with the 
conditions prescribed in this part, in its Federal-State Agreement, or 
in FCS guidelines and instructions. FCS will promptly notify the State 
agency in writing of the disqualification together with the effective 
date.
    (2) FCS may disqualify the State agency or restrict its 
participation in the FMNP when both parties agree that continuation 
under the FMNP would not produce beneficial results commensurate with 
the further expenditure of funds.
    (3) Upon termination of a grant, the affected agency shall not incur 
new obligations after the effective date of the disqualification, and 
shall cancel as many outstanding obligations as possible. FCS will allow 
full credit to the State agency for the Federal share of the 
noncancellable obligations properly incurred by the State agency prior 
to disqualification, and the State agency shall do the same for farmers/
farmers' markets.
    (4) A grant closeout shall not affect the retention period for, or 
Federal rights of access to, FMNP records as specified in Sec. 248.24(b) 
and (c). The closeout of a grant does not affect the responsibilities of 
the State agency regarding property or with respect to any FMNP income 
for which the State agency is still accountable.
    (5) A final audit is not a required part of the grant closeout and 
should not be needed unless there are problems with the grant that 
require attention. If FCS considers a final audit to be necessary, it 
shall so inform OIG. OIG will be responsible for ensuring that necessary 
final audits are performed and for any necessary coordination with other 
Federal cognizant audit agencies or State or local auditors. Audits 
performed in accordance with Sec. 248.18 may serve as final audits 
providing such audits meet the needs of requesting agencies. If the 
grant is closed out without an audit, FCS reserves the right to disallow 
and recover an appropriate amount after fully considering any 
recommended disallowances resulting from an audit which may be conducted 
later.


<R05>
Sec. 248.16  Administrative appeal of State agency decisions.

    (a) Requirements. The State agency shall provide a hearing procedure 
whereby recipients, local agencies and farmers/farmers' markets 
adversely affected by certain actions of the State agency may appeal 
those actions. A recipient may appeal disqualification/suspension of 
FMNP benefits. A local agency may appeal an action of the State agency 
disqualifying it from participating in the FMNP. A farmer/farmers' 
market may appeal an action of the State agency denying its application 
to participate, imposing a sanction, or disqualifying it from 
participating in the FMNP. Expiration of a contract or agreement shall 
not be subject to appeal.

[[Page 370]]

    (b) Postponement pending decision. An adverse action may, at the 
State agency's option, be postponed until a decision in the appeal is 
rendered.
    (1) In a case where an adverse action affects a local agency or 
farmer/farmers' market, a postponement is appropriate where the State 
agency finds that recipients would be unduly inconvenienced by the 
adverse action. In addition, the State agency may determine other 
relevant criteria to be considered in deciding whether or not to 
postpone an adverse action.
    (2) In a case where a recipient appeals the termination of benefits, 
that recipient shall continue to receive FMNP benefits until the hearing 
official reaches a decision or the expiration of the current FMNP 
season, whichever occurs first. Applicants who are denied benefits may 
appeal the denial, but shall not receive benefits while awaiting the 
decision.
    (c) Procedure. The State agency hearing procedure shall at a minimum 
provide the recipient, local agency or farmer/farmers' market with the 
following:
    (1) Written notification of the adverse action, the cause(s) for the 
action, and the effective date of the action, including the State 
agency's determination of whether the action shall be postponed under 
paragraph (b) of this section if it is appealed, and the opportunity for 
a hearing. Such notification shall be provided within a reasonable 
timeframe established by the State agency and in advance of the 
effective date of the action.
    (2) The opportunity to appeal the action within the time specified 
by the State agency in its notification of adverse action.
    (3) Adequate advance notice of the time and place of the hearing to 
provide all parties involved sufficient time to prepare for the hearing.
    (4) The opportunity to present its case and at least one opportunity 
to reschedule the hearing date upon specific request. The State agency 
may set standards on how many hearing dates can be scheduled, provided 
that a minimum of two hearing dates is allowed.
    (5) The opportunity to confront and cross-examine adverse witnesses.
    (6) The opportunity to be represented by counsel, or in the case of 
a recipient appeal, by a representative designated by the recipient, if 
desired.
    (7) The opportunity to review the case record prior to the hearing.
    (8) An impartial decision maker, whose decision as to the validity 
of the State agency's action shall rest solely on the evidence presented 
at the hearing and the statutory and regulatory provisions governing the 
FMNP. The basis for the decision shall be stated in writing, although it 
need not amount to a full opinion or contain formal findings of fact and 
conclusions of law.
    (9) Written notification of the decision in the appeal, within 60 
days from the date of receipt of the request for a hearing by the State 
agency.
    (d) Continuing responsibilities. Appealing an adverse action does 
not relieve a farmer/farmers' market or local agency permitted to 
continue in the FMNP while its appeal is pending, from responsibility 
for continued compliance with the terms of the written agreement or 
contract with the State agency.
    (e) Judicial review. If a State level decision is rendered against 
the recipient, local agency or farmer/farmers' market and the appellant 
expresses an interest in pursuing a further review of the decision, the 
State agency shall explain any further State level review of the 
decision and any available State level rehearing process. If neither is 
available or both have been exhausted, the State agency shall explain 
the right to pursue judicial review of the decision.
    (f) Additional appeals procedures for State agencies which authorize 
farmers' markets and not individual farmers. A State agency which 
authorizes farmers' markets and not individual farmers shall ensure that 
procedures are in place to be used when a farmer seeks to appeal an 
action of a farmers' market or association denying the farmer's 
application to participate, or sanctioning or disqualifying the farmer. 
The procedures shall be set forth in the State Plan and in the 
agreements entered by

[[Page 371]]

the State agency and the farmers' market and the farmers' market and the 
farmer.

[59 FR 11517, Mar. 11, 1994, as amended at 60 FR 49748, Sept. 27, 1995; 
60 FR 57148, Nov. 14, 1995]


<R04>
           Subpart F--Monitoring and Review of State Agencies


<R05>
Sec. 248.17  Management evaluations and reviews.

    (a) General. FCS and each State agency shall establish a management 
evaluation system in order to assess the accomplishment of FMNP 
objectives as provided under these regulations, the State Plan, and the 
written agreement with the Department. FCS will provide assistance to 
State agencies in discharging this responsibility, and will establish 
standards and procedures to determine how well the objectives of this 
part are being accomplished, and implement sanction procedures as 
warranted by State FMNP performance.
    (b) Responsibilities of FCS. FCS shall establish evaluation 
procedures to determine whether State agencies carry out the purposes 
and provisions of this part, the State Plan, and the written agreement 
with the Department. As a part of the evaluation procedure, FCS shall 
review audits to ensure that the FMNP has been included in audit 
examinations at a reasonable frequency. These evaluations shall also 
include reviews of selected local agencies, and on-site reviews of 
selected farmers/farmers' markets. These evaluations will measure the 
State agency's progress toward meeting the objectives outlined in its 
State Plan and the State agency's compliance with these regulations.
    (1) If FCS determines that the State agency has failed, without good 
cause, to demonstrate efficient and effective administration of its FMNP 
or has failed to comply with the requirements contained in this section 
or the State Plan, FCS may withhold an amount up to 100 percent of the 
State agency's administrative grant.
    (2) Sanctions imposed upon a State agency by FCS in accordance with 
this section (but not claims for repayment assessed against a State 
agency) may be appealed in accordance with the procedures established in 
Sec. 248.20. Before carrying out any sanction against a State agency, 
the following procedures will be followed:
    (i) FCS will notify the chief departmental officer of the 
administering agency in writing of the deficiencies found and of FCS' 
intention to withhold administrative funds unless an acceptable 
corrective action plan is submitted by the State agency to FCS within 45 
days after mailing of notification.
    (ii) The State agency shall develop a corrective action plan, 
including timeframes for implementation to address the deficiencies and 
prevent their future recurrence.
    (iii) If the corrective action plan is acceptable, FCS will notify 
the chief departmental officer of the administering agency in writing 
within 30 days of receipt of the plan. The letter will advise the State 
agency of the sanctions to be imposed if the corrective action plan is 
not implemented according to the schedule set forth in the approved 
plan.
    (iv) Upon notification from the State agency that corrective action 
has been taken, FCS will assess such action, and, if necessary, perform 
a follow-up review to determine if the noted deficiencies have been 
corrected. FCS will then advise the State agency of whether the actions 
taken are in compliance with the corrective action plan, and whether the 
deficiency is resolved or further corrective action is needed. 
Compliance buys can be required if during FCS management evaluations by 
regional offices, a State agency is found to be out of compliance with 
its responsibility to monitor and review farmers/farmers' markets.
    (v) If an acceptable corrective action plan is not submitted within 
45 days, or if corrective action is not completed according to the 
schedule established in the corrective action plan, FCS may withhold the 
award of FMNP administrative funds. If the 45-day warning period ends in 
the fourth quarter of a fiscal year, FCS may elect not to withhold funds 
until the next fiscal year. FCS will notify the chief departmental 
officer of the administering State agency.

[[Page 372]]

    (vi) If compliance is achieved before the end of the fiscal year in 
which the FMNP administrative funds are withheld, the funds withheld may 
be restored to the State agency. FCS is not required to restore funds 
withheld beyond the end of the fiscal year for which the funds were 
initially awarded.
    (c) Responsibilities of State agencies. The State agency is 
responsible for meeting the following requirements:
    (1) The State agency shall establish evaluation and review 
procedures and document the results of such procedures. The procedures 
shall include, but are not limited to:
    (i) Annual monitoring reviews of participating farmers' farmers' 
markets, including on-site reviews of a minimum of 10 percent of farmers 
and 10 percent of farmers' markets, which includes those farmers and 
markets identified as being the highest risk. First year of operation in 
the FMNP shall be considered a high-risk indicator. More frequent 
reviews may be performed as the State agency deems necessary.
    (ii) Conducting monitoring reviews of all local agencies within the 
State agency's jurisdiction at least once every 2 years. Monitoring of 
local agencies shall encompass, but not be limited to, evaluation of 
management, accountability, certification, nutrition education, 
financial management systems, and coupon management systems. WIC State 
agency reviews of local agencies conducted for the WIC Program may 
contribute to meeting the FMNP requirement that all local agencies be 
reviewed once every two years if the reviews include reviews of FMNP 
practices. When the WIC State agency conducts a review of the local 
agency outside of the FMNP season, a review of documents and procedural 
plans of the FMNP, rather than actual FMNP activities, is acceptable.
    (iii) Instituting the necessary follow-up procedures to correct 
identified problem areas.
    (2) On its own initiative or when required by FCS, the State agency 
shall provide special reports on FMNP activities, and take positive 
action to correct deficiencies in FMNP operations.

[59 FR 11517, Mar. 11, 1994, as amended at 60 FR 49748, Sept. 27, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 248.18  Audits.

    (a) Federal access to information. The Secretary, the Comptroller 
General of the United States, or any of their duly authorized 
representatives, or duly authorized State auditors shall have access to 
any books, documents, papers, and records of the State agency and their 
contractors, for the purpose of making surveys, audits, examinations, 
excerpts, and transcripts.
    (b) State agency response. The State agency may take exception to 
particular audit findings and recommendations. The State agency shall 
submit a response or statement to FCS as to the action taken or planned 
regarding the findings. A proposed corrective action plan developed and 
submitted by the State agency shall include specific time frames for its 
implementation and for completion of the correction of deficiencies and 
problems leading to the deficiencies.
    (c) Corrective action. FCS shall determine whether FMNP deficiencies 
identified in an audit have been adequately corrected. If additional 
corrective action is necessary, FCS shall schedule a follow-up review, 
allowing a reasonable time for such corrective action to be taken.
    (d) State sponsored audits. State and local agencies shall conduct 
independent audits in accordance with 7 CFR part 3015, Sec. 3016.26 or 
part 3051, as applicable. A State or local agency may elect to obtain 
either an organization-wide audit or an audit of the Program if it 
qualifies to make such an election under applicable regulations.


<R05>
Sec. 248.19  Investigations.

    (a) Authority. The Department may make an investigation of any 
allegation of noncompliance with this part and FCS guidelines and 
instructions. The investigation may include, where appropriate, a review 
of pertinent practices and policies of any State and local agency, the 
circumstances under which the possible noncompliance with this part 
occurred, and other factors relevant to a determination as to whether 
the State and local agency has failed to comply with the requirements of 
this part.
    (b) Confidentiality. No State or local agency, recipient, or other 
person shall

[[Page 373]]

intimidate, threaten, coerce, or discriminate against any individual for 
the purpose of interfering with any right or privilege under this part 
because that person has made a complaint or formal allegation, or has 
testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation, 
proceeding, or hearing under this part. The identity of every 
complainant shall be kept confidential except to the extent necessary to 
carry out the purposes of this part, including the conducting of any 
investigation, hearing, or judicial proceeding.


<R04>
                   Subpart G--Miscellaneous Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 248.20  Claims and penalties.

    (a) Claims against State agencies. (1) If FCS determines through a 
review of the State agency's reports, program or financial analysis, 
monitoring, audit, or otherwise, that any FMNP funds provided to a State 
agency for food or administrative purposes were, through State agency 
negligence or fraud, misused or otherwise diverted from FMNP purposes, a 
formal claim will be assessed by FCS against the State agency. The State 
agency shall pay promptly to FCS a sum equal to the amount of the 
administrative funds or the value of coupons so misused or diverted.
    (2) If FCS determines that any part of the FMNP funds received by a 
State agency; or coupons, were lost as a result of theft, embezzlement, 
or unexplained causes, the State agency shall, on demand by FCS, pay to 
FCS a sum equal to the amount of the money or the value of the FMNP 
coupons so lost.
    (3) The State agency shall have full opportunity to submit evidence, 
explanation or information concerning alleged instances of noncompliance 
or diversion before a final determination is made in such cases.
    (4) FCS is authorized to establish claims against a State agency for 
unreconciled FMNP coupons. When a State agency can demonstrate that all 
reasonable management efforts have been devoted to reconciliation and 99 
percent or more of the FMNP coupons issued have been accounted for by 
the reconciliation process, FCS may determine that the reconciliation 
process has been completed to satisfaction.
    (b) Interest charge on claims against State agencies. If an 
agreement cannot be reached with the State agency for payment of its 
debts or for offset of debts on its current Letter of Credit within 30 
days from the date of the first demand letter from FCS, FCS will assess 
an interest (late) charge against the State agency. Interest accrual 
shall begin on the 31st day after the date of the first demand letter, 
bill or claim, and shall be computed monthly on any unpaid balance as 
long as the debt exists. From a source other than the FMNP, the State 
agency shall provide the funds necessary to maintain FMNP operations at 
the grant level authorized by FCS.
    (c) Penalties. In accordance with section 12(g) of the National 
School Lunch Act, whoever embezzles, willfully misapplies, steals or 
obtains by fraud any funds, assets or property provided under section 17 
of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966, as amended, whether received 
directly or indirectly from USDA, or whoever receives, conceals or 
retains such funds, assets or property for his or her own interest, 
knowing such funds, assets or property have been embezzled, willfully 
misapplied, stolen, or obtained by fraud shall, if such funds, assets or 
property are of the value of $100 or more, be fined not more than 
$10,000 or imprisoned not more than five years, or both, or if such 
funds, assets or property are of a value of less than $100, shall be 
fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned for not more than one year, or 
both.


<R05>
Sec. 248.21  Procurement and property management.

    (a) Requirements. State agencies shall comply with the requirements 
of 7 CFR part 3016 for procurement of supplies, equipment and other 
services with FMNP funds. These requirements are adopted by FCS to 
ensure that such materials and services are obtained for the FMNP in an 
effective manner and in compliance with the provisions of applicable law 
and executive orders.
    (b) Contractual responsibilities. The standards contained in 7 CFR 
part 3016 do not relieve the State agency of the

[[Page 374]]

responsibilities arising under its contracts. The State agency is the 
responsible authority, without recourse to FCS, regarding the settlement 
and satisfaction of all contractual and administrative issues arising 
out of procurements entered into in connection with the FMNP. This 
includes, but is not limited to, disputes, claims, protests of award, 
source evaluation, or other matters of a contractual nature. Matters 
concerning violation of law are to be referred to such local, State or 
Federal authority as may have proper jurisdiction.
    (c) State regulations. The State agency may use its own procurement 
regulations which reflect applicable State and local regulations, 
provided that procurements made with FMNP funds adhere to the standards 
set forth in 7 CFR part 3016.
    (d) Property acquired with program funds. State and local agencies 
shall observe the standards prescribed in 7 CFR part 3016 in their 
utilization and disposition of real property and equipment acquired in 
whole or in part with FMNP funds.


<R05>
Sec. 248.22  Nonprocurement debarment/suspension, drug-free workplace, and lobbying restrictions.

    The State agency shall ensure compliance with the requirements of 
the Department's regulations governing nonprocurement debarment/
suspension (7 CFR part 3017), drug-free workplace (7 CFR part 3017), and 
the Department's regulations governing restrictions on lobbying (7 CFR 
part 3018), where applicable.


<R05>
Sec. 248.23  Records and reports.

    (a) Recordkeeping requirements. Each State agency shall maintain 
full and complete records concerning FMNP operations. Such records shall 
comply with 7 CFR part 3016 and the following requirements:
    (1) Records shall include, but not be limited to, information 
pertaining to financial operations, FMNP coupon issuance and redemption, 
equipment purchases and inventory, nutrition education, and civil rights 
procedures.
    (2) All records shall be retained for a minimum of 3 years following 
the date of submission of the final expenditure report for the period to 
which the report pertains. If any litigation, claim, negotiation, audit 
or other action involving the records has been started before the end of 
the 3-year period, the records shall be kept until all issues are 
resolved, or until the end of the regular 3-year period, whichever is 
later. If FCS deems any of the FMNP records to be of historical 
interest, it may require the State agency to forward such records to FCS 
whenever the State agency is disposing of them.
    (3) Records for nonexpendable property acquired in whole or in part 
with FMNP funds shall be retained for three years after its final 
disposition.
    (4) All records shall be available during normal business hours for 
representatives of the Department of the Comptroller General of the 
United States to inspect, audit, and copy. Any reports resulting from 
such examinations shall not divulge names of individuals.
    (b) Financial and recipient reports. State agencies shall submit 
financial and FMNP performance data on a yearly basis as specified by 
FCS and required by section 17(m)(8) of the CNA. Such information shall 
include, but shall not be limited to:
    (1) Number and type of recipients (Federal and non-Federal).
    (2) Value of coupons issued.
    (3) Value of coupons redeemed.
    (c) Source documentation. To be acceptable for audit purposes, all 
financial and FMNP performance reports shall be traceable to source 
documentation.
    (d) Certification of reports. Financial and FMNP reports shall be 
certified as to their completeness and accuracy by the person given that 
responsibility by the State agency.
    (e) Use of reports. FCS will use State agency reports to measure 
progress in achieving objectives set forth in the State Plan, and this 
part, or other State agency performance plans. If it is determined, 
through review of State agency reports, FMNP or financial analysis, or 
an audit, that a State agency is not meeting the objectives set forth in 
its State Plan, FCS may request additional information including, but 
not limited to, reasons for failure to achieve these objectives.

[[Page 375]]


<R05>
Sec. 248.24  Other provisions.

    (a) No aid reduction. The value of benefits or assistance available 
under the FMNP shall not be considered as income or resources of 
recipients or their families for any purpose under Federal, State, or 
local laws, including, but not limited to, laws relating to taxation, 
welfare and public assistance programs. Section 17(m)(7)(B) of the CNA 
provides that any programs for which a grant is received under this 
subsection shall be supplementary to the food stamp program carried out 
under the Food Stamp Act of 1977 as amended (7 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.) and 
to any other Federal or State program under which foods are distributed 
to needy families in lieu of food stamps.
    (b) Statistical information. FCS reserves the right to use 
information obtained under the FMNP in a summary, statistical or other 
form which does not identify particular individuals.
    (c) Confidentiality. The State agency shall restrict the use or 
disclosure of information obtained from FMNP applicants and recipients 
to persons directly connected with the administration or enforcement of 
the WIC Program or the FMNP, including persons investigating or 
prosecuting violations in the WIC Program or FMNP under Federal, State 
or local authority.


<R05>
Sec. 248.25  FMNP information.

    Any person who wishes information, assistance, records or other 
public material shall request such information from the State agency, or 
from the FCS Regional Office serving the appropriate State as listed 
below:
    (a) Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New York, 
Rhode Island, Vermont: U.S. Department of Agriculture, FCS, Northeast 
Region, 10 Causeway Street, Room 501, Boston, Massachusetts 02222-1066.
    (b) Delaware, District of Columbia, Maryland, New Jersey, 
Pennsylvania, Puerto Rico, Virginia, Virgin Islands, West Virginia: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, FCS, Mid-Atlantic Region, Mercer Corporate 
Park, 300 Corporate Boulevard, Robbinsville, New Jersey, 08691-1598.
    (c) Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Mississippi, North 
Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
FCS, Southeast Region, 77 Forsyth Street, SW., suite 112, Atlanta, 
Georgia 30303.
    (d) Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Ohio, Wisconsin: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, FCS, Midwest Region, 77 West Jackson 
Boulevard--20th floor, Chicago, Illinois 60604-3507.
    (e) Arkansas, Louisiana, New Mexico, Oklahoma, Texas: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, FCS, Southwest Region, 1100 Commerce Street, 
room 5-C-30, Dallas, Texas 75242.
    (f) Colorado, Iowa, Kansas, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, North 
Dakota, South Dakota, Utah, Wyoming: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
FCS, Mountain Plains Region, 1244 Speer Boulevard, suite 903, Denver, 
Colorado 80204.
    (g) Alaska, American Samoa, Arizona, California, Guam, Hawaii, 
Idaho, Nevada, Oregon, Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, the 
Northern Mariana Islands, Washington: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
FCS, Western Region, 550 Kearny Street, room 400, San Francisco, 
California 94108.

[59 FR 11517, Mar. 11, 1994, as amended at 60 FR 49748, Sept. 27, 1995; 
60 FR 57148, Nov. 14, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 248.26  OMB control number.

    The collecting of information requirements for part 248 have been 
approved by the Office of Management and Budget and assigned OMB control 
number 0584-0477.

[60 FR 49748, Sept. 27, 1995]

[[Page 376]]


<R03>
    SUBCHAPTER B--GENERAL REGULATIONS AND POLICIES--FOOD DISTRIBUTION

<R05>


<R03>
PART 250--DONATION OF FOODS FOR USE IN THE UNITED STATES, ITS TERRITORIES AND POSSESSIONS AND AREAS UNDER ITS JURISDICTION--Table of Contents

<R05>


                           Subpart A--General

Sec.
250.1  General purpose and scope.
250.2  Administration.
250.3  Definitions.

                 Subpart B--General Operating Provisions

250.10  Eligible distributing and subdistributing agencies.
250.11  Eligibility determination for recipient agencies and recipients.
250.12  Agreements and contracts.
250.13  Distribution and control of donated foods.
250.14  Warehousing, distribution and storage of donated foods.
250.15  Financial management.
250.16  Maintenance of records.
250.17  Reports.
250.18  Audits.
250.19  Reviews.
250.20  Sanctions.
250.21  Civil rights.
250.22  Complaints.
250.23  Buy American.
250.24  Distributing agency performance standards.

           Subpart C--Processing and Labeling of Donated Foods

250.30  State processing of donated foods.

           Subpart D--Eligible Recipient Agencies and Programs

250.40  Nonprofit summer camps for children.
250.41  Charitable institutions.
250.42  Nutrition programs for the elderly.
250.43  Disaster organizations.
250.44  Special group food assistance programs.
250.45  Commodity Supplemental Food Program.
250.46  Food Distribution Program in the Trust Territory of the Pacific 
          Islands.
250.47  Food Distribution Program on Indian reservations.
250.48  School food authorities and commodity schools.
250.49  Nonresidential child and adult care institutions.
250.50  Service institutions.
250.51  Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and 
          Children.
250.52  Section 110 commodities.

                 Subpart E--Where to Obtain Information

250.60  Program information.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 301; 7 U.S.C. 612c, 612c note, 1431, 1431b, 
1431e, 1431 note, 1446a-1, 1859; 15 U.S.C. 713c; 22 U.S.C. 1922; 42 
U.S.C. 1751, 1755, 1758, 1760, 1761, 1762a, 1766, 3030a, 5179, 5180.

    Source: 53 FR 20426, June 3, 1988, unless otherwise noted.


<R04>
                           Subpart A--General


<R05>
Sec. 250.1  General purpose and scope.

    This part prescribes the terms and conditions under which donated 
foods may be obtained from the Department by Federal, State and private 
agencies for use in any State in child nutrition programs, nonprofit 
summer camps for children, charitable institutions, nutrition programs 
for the elderly, the Commodity Supplemental Food Program, the Special 
Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children, the 
Food Distribution Programs on Indian Reservations and the assistance of 
needy persons.


<R05>
Sec. 250.2  Administration.

    (a) Delegation to FCS. Within the Department, FCS shall act on 
behalf of the Department in the administration of the program. FCS will 
provide assistance to distributing agencies and evaluate all levels of 
program operations to assure that the goals of the program are achieved 
in the most effective and efficient manner possible.
    (b) Delegation to distributing agency. The distributing agency is 
responsible for effective and efficient administration of program 
operations within its jurisdiction and shall administer the program in 
accordance with the requirements of this part and FCS guidelines and 
instructions. Distributing agencies may impose additional requirements 
for participation that are not inconsistent with the provisions of

[[Page 377]]

this part, except that this provision shall not apply to distribution to 
households on all or part of an Indian reservation which is 
participating in the Food Distribution Program under part 253 and part 
254 of this chapter. The distributing agency shall provide guidance to 
subdistributing agencies and recipient agencies on all aspects of 
program operations.
    (c) Personnel. Each distributing agency shall provide adequate 
personnel, to administer the program in accordance with this part.


<R05>
Sec. 250.3  Definitions.

    Charitable institutions means:
    (a) A nonpenal, noneducational public (Federal, State or local) 
institution,
    (b) A nonprofit, tax exempt, private hospital, or
    (c) Any other nonprofit, noneducational, tax exempt private 
institution, including hospitals and facilities caring for needy infants 
and children, organized to provide charitable or public welfare services 
in the same place without marked changes and, at the Department's 
option, approved by a public welfare agency as meeting a definite need 
in the community by administering to needy persons, and provides a meal 
service on a regular basis. Charitable institutions include any 
institution defined as ``service institution''; ``nonresidential child 
care institution''; or ``school'' which is not a commodity school or 
does not participate in a child nutrition program. For purposes of this 
paragraph, tax exempt shall mean exempt from income tax under the 
Internal Revenue Code, as amended, and a charitable institution shall be 
considered ``noneducational'' even though educational courses are given, 
where such courses are incidental to the primary purpose of the 
charitable institution.
    Child nutrition program means the National School Lunch Program, the 
School Breakfast Program, the Summer Food Service Program for Children, 
or the Child Care Food Program (parts 210, 220, 225, and 226 
respectively of this chapter).
    Commodities means foods donated, or available for donation, by the 
Department under any of the legislation referred to in this part (see 
``Donated Foods'').
    Commodity school means a school that does not participate in the 
National School Lunch Program under part 210 of this chapter but which 
operates a nonprofit school food service under agreement with the State 
educational agency or FCSRO as provided for under part 210 of this 
chapter and receives donated foods, or donated foods and cash or 
services of a value of up to 5 cents per lunch in lieu of donated foods 
under part 240 of this chapter for processing and handling of the 
donated foods.
    Contract value of the donated foods means the price assigned by the 
Department to a donated food which shall reflect the Department's 
current acquisition price, transportation and, if applicable, processing 
costs related to the food.
    Contracting agency means the distributing agency, subdistributing 
agency, or recipient agency which enters into a processing contract.
    Department means the United States Department of Agriculture or the 
Commodity Credit Corporation, whichever is the donor under the pertinent 
legislation.
    Disaster organizations means organizations authorized by appropriate 
Federal or State officials to assist disaster victims.
    Disaster victims means persons who, because of acts of God or 
manmade disasters, are in need of food assistance, whether or not they 
are victims of a major disaster or an emergency as defined in this 
section.
    Discount system means a system whereby a recipient agency purchases 
end products directly from a processor at an established wholesale price 
minus the contract value of the donated foods contained in the end 
products.
    Distributing agency means a State, Federal or private agency, or 
Indian Tribal Organization (ITO) which enters into an agreement with the 
Department for the distribution of donated foods to eligible recipient 
agencies and recipients and the Food and Consumer Service of the 
Department when it accepts title to commodities from the Commodity 
Credit Corporation (CCC) for distribution to eligible recipient agencies 
pursuant to the National

[[Page 378]]

Commodity Processing System. A distributing agency may also be a 
recipient agency.
    Distributor means a commercial food purveyor or handler who is 
independent of a processor and both sells and bills for the end products 
delivered to recipient agencies.
    Donated foods means foods donated, or available for donation, by the 
Department under any of the legislation referred to in this part (see 
``Commodities'').
    Emergency means any hurricane, tornado, storm, flood, high water, 
wind-driven water, tidal wave, tsunami, earthquake, volcanic eruption, 
landslide, mudslide, snowstorm, drought, fire, explosion, or other 
catastrophe in any part of the United States which requires Federal 
emergency assistance to supplement State and local efforts to save lives 
and protect property, health, and safety or to avert or lessen the 
threat of a disaster.
    End product means a product containing any amount of donated foods 
which have been processed.
    Federal acceptance service means the acceptance service provided by:
    (a) The applicable grading branches of the Department's Agricultural 
Marketing Service (AMS),
    (b) The Department's Federal Grain Inspection Service, and
    (c) The National Marine Fisheries Service of the U.S. Department of 
Commerce.
    Fee-for-service means the price by pound or by case representing a 
processor's cost of ingredients (other than donated foods), labor, 
packaging, overhead, and other costs incurred in the conversion of the 
donated food into the specified end product.
    Fiscal year means the period of 12 months beginning October 1 of any 
calendar year and ending September 30 of the following year.
    FCS means the Food and Consumer Service of the Department of 
Agriculture.
    FCSRO means the appropriate Food and Consumer Service Regional 
Office of the Food and Consumer Service of the Department of 
Agriculture.
    Food bank means a public or charitable institution that maintains an 
established operation involving the provision of food or edible 
commodities, or the products thereof, to food pantries, soup kitchens, 
hunger relief centers, or other food or feeding centers that provide 
meals or food to needy persons on a regular basis as an integral part of 
its normal activities.
    Food service management company means a commercial enterprise or a 
nonprofit organization which is or may be contracted with by a recipient 
agency to manage any aspect of its food service in accordance with 
Sec. 250.12(c) of this part or in accordance with part 210, 220, 225, or 
226 of this chapter.
    Household means a group of related or non-related individuals, 
exclusive of boarders, who are not residents of an institution, but who 
are living as one economic unit and for whom food is customarily 
purchased and prepared in common. It also means a single individual 
living alone.
    In-kind replacement means replacement of lost donated foods with a 
quantity of the same foods of U.S. origin that are of equal or better 
quality than the lost foods and that are of at least equal monetary 
value to the Department's cost of replacing the lost foods.
    Major disaster means any hurricane, tornado, storm, flood, high 
water, wind-driven water, tidal wave, tsunami, earthquake, volcanic 
eruption, landslide, mudslide, snowstorm, drought, fire, explosion, or 
other catastrophe in any part of the United States which, in the 
determination of the President, causes damage of sufficient severity and 
magnitude to warrant major disaster assistance under the Disaster Relief 
Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5121), above and beyond emergency services by the 
Federal Government, to supplement the efforts and available resources of 
States, local governments, and disaster relief organizations in 
alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering caused thereby. 
(This definition is taken from the Disaster Relief Act of 1974.)
    Multi-State processor means:
    (a) A processor which has entered into a processing contract with 
contracting agencies in more than one State, or
    (b) A processor which has entered into a processing contract with 
one or more contracting agencies located in a

[[Page 379]]

State other than the one in which either the processor's plant or 
business office is located.
    Needy persons means:
    (a) Persons provided service by charitable institutions, who, 
because of their economic status, are in need of food assistance,
    (b) All the members of a household who are certified as in need of 
food assistance, and
    (c) Disaster victims.
    Nonprofit school food service means all food service operations 
conducted by the school food authority principally for the benefit of 
school children, all of the revenue from which is used solely for the 
operation or improvement of such food services.
    Nonprofit summer camps for children means nonprofit camps which do 
not participate in the Summer Food Service Program for Children 
authorized under section 13 of the National School Lunch Act, as amended 
(42 U.S.C. 1761), and in which, during the months of May through 
September, meal services are conducted for children of high school grade 
and under.
    Nonresidential child or adult care institution means any child or 
adult care institution (as defined in part 226 of this chapter) which 
participates in the Child and Adult Care Food Program authorized under 
section 17 of the National School Lunch Act, as amended (42 U.S.C. 
1766).
    Nutrition program for the elderly means a project conducted by a 
recipient of a grant or contract under title III or title VI of the 
Older Americans Act of 1965, as amended (42 U.S.C. 3030a).
    Offer-and-acceptance system means a procedure whereby a school food 
authority is given the opportunity to order only the amounts and 
varieties of donated foods it desires for its school lunch program on 
the basis of advance notification by the distributing agency.
    Performance supply and surety bond means a written instrument issued 
by a surety company which guarantees performance and supply of end 
products by a processor under the terms of a processing contract.
    Processing means:
    (a) The conversion of a donated food or donated foods into a 
different end product or
    (b) The repackaging of a donated food or donated foods.
    Processor means any commercial facility which processes or 
repackages donated foods. However, commercial enterprises which handle, 
prepare and/or serve products or meals containing donated foods on-site 
solely for the individual recipient agency under contract are exempt 
under this definition. Notwithstanding this definition, a recipient 
agency which prepares products or meals containing donated foods for 
more than one recipient agency under more than one contract in the same 
facility or prepares products or meals for any one recipient agency off-
site shall not be a processor if the recipient agency preparing products 
or meals provides: (1) accountability for any donated foods received 
from another recipient agency consistent with Sec. 250.16 of this part 
and (2) any funds received as payment for preparing products or meals 
shall be deposited in the non-profit meal account of the recipient 
agency preparing products or meals.
    Program means the Food Distribution Program.
    Recipient agencies means nonprofit summer camps for children, 
charitable institutions, nutrition programs for the elderly, disaster 
organizations, school food authorities, schools, nonresidential child 
care institutions, service institutions, and welfare agencies receiving 
foods for their own use or for distribution to eligible recipients.
    Recipients means the needy persons receiving commodities for 
household consumption.
    Refund means (a) a credit or check issued to a distributor in an 
amount equal to the contract value of donated foods contained in an end 
product sold by the distributor to a recipient agency at a discounted 
price and (b) a check issued to a recipient agency in an amount equal to 
the contract value of donated foods contained in an end product sold to 
the recipient agency under a refund system.
    Refund application means an application by a recipient agency in any 
form

[[Page 380]]

acceptable to the processor which certifies purchase of end products and 
requests a refund of the contract value of the donated foods contained 
in the end products purchased.
    Refund system means a system whereby a recipient agency purchases a 
processor's end products and receives from the processor a payment 
equivalent to the contract value of the donated foods contained in the 
end products.
    School means:
    (a) An educational unit of high school grade or under, recognized as 
part of the educational system in the State and operating under public 
or nonprofit private ownership in a single building or complex of 
buildings. The term ``high school grade or under'' includes classes of 
preprimary grade when recognized as part of the education system of the 
States;
    (b) Any public or nonprofit private classes of preprimary grade when 
they are conducted in those schools defined in paragraph (a) of this 
definition having classes of primary or of higher grade;
    (c) Any public or nonprofit private residential child care 
institution, or distinct part of such institution, which operates 
principally for the care of children, and if private, is licensed to 
provide residential child care services under the appropriate licensing 
code by the State or a subordinate level of government, except for 
residential summer camps which participate in the Summer Food Service 
Program for Children, Job Corps centers funded by the Department of 
Labor and private foster homes. The term ``residential child care 
institutions'' includes, but is not limited to: homes for the mentally, 
emotionally or physically impaired, and unmarried mothers and their 
infants; group homes; halfway houses; orphanages; temporary shelters for 
abused children and for runaway children; long-term care facilities for 
chronically ill children; and juvenile detention centers. A long-term 
care facility is a hospital, skilled nursing facility, intermediate care 
facility, or distinct part thereof, which is intended for the care of 
children confined for 30 days or more; or
    (d) With respect to the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, nonprofit child 
care centers certified as such by the Governor of Puerto Rico.
    School food authority means the governing body which is responsible 
for the administration of one or more schools and which has the legal 
authority to operate a nonprofit school food service therein or 
otherwise approved by FCS to operate the NSLP.
    School year means the period of 12 months beginning July 1 of any 
calendar year and ending June 30 of the following calendar year.
    Secretary means the Secretary of Agriculture.
    Section 4(a) means section 4(a) of the Agriculture and Consumer 
Protection Act of 1973, as amended (7 U.S.C. 612c note). Section 4(a) 
authorizes the purchase of foods for distribution to maintain the 
traditional level of assistance for food assistance programs as are 
authorized by law, including institutions, supplemental feeding 
programs, disaster areas, summer camps for children, the Trust Territory 
of the Pacific Islands, and Indians whenever a tribal organization 
requests distribution of federally-donated foods under section 4(b) of 
the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 U.S.C. 2013(b)).
    Section 6 means section 6 of the National School Lunch Act, as 
amended (42 U.S.C. 1755). Section 6 authorizes the purchase of foods for 
distribution to schools and institutions participating in child 
nutrition programs under the National School Lunch Act and specifies the 
level of assistance which is to be provided.
    Section 14 means section 14 of the National School Lunch Act, as 
amended (42 U.S.C. 1762a). Section 14 authorizes the purchase of foods 
for distribution to maintain the annually programmed level of assistance 
for programs carried on under the National School Lunch Act, the Child 
Nutrition Act of 1966, and title III of the Older Americans Act of 1965.
    Section 32 means section 32 of Pub. L. 74-320, as amended (7 U.S.C. 
612c). Section 32 authorizes the Department to purchase nonbasic 
perishable foods available under surplus-removal operations, for the 
purpose of encouraging the domestic consumption of such foods by 
diverting them from the normal channels of trade or commerce.

[[Page 381]]

    Section 311 means section 311 of the Older Americans Act of 1965, as 
amended (42 U.S.C. 3030a). Section 311 authorizes the purchase of 
commodities for nutrition programs for the elderly.
    Section 416 means section 416 of the Agricultural Act of 1949, as 
amended (7 U.S.C. 1431). Section 416 authorizes the Department to donate 
basic nonperishable foods acquired through Federal price-support 
operations for use by needy persons, for use in nonprofit school lunch 
programs and nonprofit summer camps for children, and for use in 
charitable institutions to the extent that needy persons are served.
    Section 709 means section 709 of the Food and Agricultural Act of 
1965, as amended (7 U.S.C. 1446a-1). Section 709 authorizes the purchase 
of adequate supplies of dairy products to meet the requirements of 
schools, domestic relief distribution, and other programs authorized by 
law when the stocks of the Commodity Credit Corporation are insufficient 
to meet those requirements.
    Service institutions means camps or sponsors (as those terms are 
defined in part 225 of this chapter) which participate in the Summer 
Food Service program authorized under section 13 of the National School 
Lunch Act, as amended (42 U.S.C. 1761).
    Similar replacement means replacement of lost donated foods with a 
quantity of similiar foods of U.S. origin of the same types as those 
normally donated by the Department and of at least equal monetary value 
to the Department's cost of replacing the lost foods. Such replacement 
shall be subject to the approval of the FCSRO.
    Soup kitchen means a public or charitable institution that maintains 
an established feeding operation to provide food to needy homeless 
persons on a regular basis as an integral part of its normal activities.
    State and United States means any one of the 50 States, the District 
of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and 
the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands.
    State Agency on Aging means:
    (a) the State agency that has been designated by the Governor and 
approved by the United States Department of Health and Human Services 
(DHHS) to administer nutrition programs for the elderly under title III 
of the Older Americans Act of 1965, as amended or
    (b) The Indian tribal organization which has been approved by DHHS 
to administer nutrition programs for the elderly under title VI of such 
act.
    Students in home economics means students in regular classes wherein 
they are taught general home economics including food preparation, 
cooking, serving, nutrition, food purchasing, child care and health.
    Subdistributing agency means an agency performing one or more 
distribution functions for a distributing agency other than, or in 
addition to, functions normally performed by common carriers or 
warehousemen. A subdistributing agency may also be a recipient agency.
    Substituted food means domestically produced food that is purchased 
or manufactured by a processor and is substituted for donated food.
    Substitution means:
    (a) The replacement of donated foods with like quantities of 
domestically produced commercial foods of the same generic identity and 
of equal or better quality (i.e. cheddar cheese for cheddar cheese, 
nonfat dry milk for nonfat dry milk, etc.); or
    (b) In the case of donated nonfat dry milk, substitution as defined 
under (a) of this definition or replacement with an equivalent amount, 
based on milk solids content, of domestically produced concentrated skim 
milk.
    Welfare agency means a public (Federal, State or local) or private 
agency offering assistance on a charitable or welfare basis to needy 
persons, who are not residents of an institution, and to Tribal councils 
designated by the Bureau of Indian Affairs.

[53 FR 20426, June 3, 1988, as amended at 53 FR 20598, June 6, 1988; 53 
FR 27475, July 21, 1988; 58 FR 39120, July 22, 1993; 59 FR 16972, Apr. 
11, 1994; 59 FR 62983, Dec. 7, 1994]


<R04>
                 Subpart B--General Operating Provisions


<R05>
Sec. 250.10  Eligible distributing and subdistributing agencies.

    (a) State and Federal agencies. Federal agencies and such State 
agencies as are

[[Page 382]]

designated by the Governor of the State, or by the State legislature, 
and approved by the Secretary are eligible to become distributing 
agencies.
    (b) Private agencies. Where distributing agencies are not permitted 
by law to make distribution to private recipient agencies, or to any 
class of private recipient agency, private agencies which agree to make 
distribution of donated food on a State-wide basis and which apply 
directly to FCS, and are approved by the Secretary are eligible to 
become distributing agencies.
    (c) Subdistributing agencies. If distributing agencies use 
subdistributing agencies to distribute donated foods, the distributing 
agencies' responsibilities to the Department for overall management and 
control of the distribution program shall not be delegated to such 
subdistributing agencies.


<R05>
Sec. 250.11  Eligibility determination for recipient agencies and recipients.

    (a) Verification of recipient agency eligibility. Distributing 
agencies at the request of FCS shall:
    (1) Verify that recipient agencies registered to participate in the 
National Commodity Processing (NCP) Program have a current agreement 
with the distributing agency to receive donated food in accordance with 
Sec. 252.1(c) and
    (2) Report the results of such verification to FCS within timeframes 
determined by FCS.
    (b) Eligibility of recipient agencies and recipients. Distributing 
agencies shall determine the eligibility of any agency which submits an 
application for participation in the program. Distributing agencies 
shall consider the past performance of recipient agencies when approving 
applications for participation. Once a recipient agency has been 
determined to be eligible for participation in the program, the 
distributing agency shall enter into an agreement with the agency in 
accordance with Sec. 250.12(b) and make donated food available. 
Distributing agencies shall impose upon welfare agencies the 
responsibility for determining that recipients to whom welfare agencies 
distribute donated foods are eligible: Provided, however: That the State 
agency or FCSRO administering the applicable program shall determine the 
eligibility under this part of school food authorities participating 
under part 210 or part 220, or sponsors participating in the Summer Food 
Service Program for Children under part 225, of this chapter, and of 
nonresidential child care institutions participating in the Child Care 
Food Program under part 226 of this chapter.


<R05>
Sec. 250.12  Agreements and contracts.

    (a) Agreements with Department. Prior to the beginning of a 
distribution program, distributing agencies shall enter into written 
agreements with the Department which shall incorporate the terms and 
conditions set forth in this part. When requested by the Department an 
eligible agency shall present evidence of its authority to enter into 
such agreements. The agreements shall be effective for no longer than 
one year and must be completed by September 30 of each year. In 
addition, agreements between the Department and State Agencies on Aging 
which elect to receive cash in lieu of commodities shall also be 
effective for no longer than one year and must be completed by September 
30 of each year.
    (b) Distributing agency agreements. Distributing agencies shall 
enter into written agreements with all subdistributing agencies, 
recipient agencies, warehouses, carriers, or other entities to which 
distributing agencies deliver donated foods under their distribution 
program. Distributing agencies shall be responsible for ensuring that 
program integrity is maintained by all entities with whom agreements are 
entered into. All agreements shall contain such terms and conditions as 
the distributing agency deems necessary to ensure that:
    (1) The distribution and use of donated foods is in accordance with 
this part,
    (2) Subdistributing agencies, recipient agencies, warehouses, 
carriers, or other persons to whom donated foods are delivered by the 
distributing agency are responsible to the distributing agency for any 
improper distribution or use of donated foods or for any loss of, or 
damage to, donated foods caused by their fault or negligence,
    (3) Subdistributing agencies and recipient agencies have and 
preserve a

[[Page 383]]

right to assert claims against other persons to whom donated foods are 
delivered for care, handling or distribution, and
    (4) Subdistributing agencies and recipient agencies will take action 
to obtain restitution in connection with claims for improper 
distribution, use or loss of, or damage to, donated foods.

To the extent that bills of lading and warehouse receipts satisfy the 
above-stated criteria, the distributing agency may consider such 
documents as appropriate agreements. The agreement shall be in effect 
for not longer than one year and shall provide that it may be extended 
at the option of both parties for two additional one year periods. 
Agreements may be terminated for cause by either party upon 30 days 
notice. At the time the agreement is extended, the party contracting 
with the distributing agency must update all pertinent information and 
must demonstrate that all donated food received during the prior 
contract period has been accounted for.
    (c) Food service management company agreements. Food service 
management companies may be employed to conduct the food service 
operations of nonprofit summer camps for children, charitable 
institutions, nutrition programs for the elderly, schools, 
nonresidential child care institutions, and service institutions. In 
instances when a food service management company is employed to provide 
such services, the recipient agency shall enter into a written contract 
with the food service management company which shall expressly provide 
that:
    (1) Any donated foods received by the recipient agency and made 
available to the food service management company shall be utilized 
solely for the purpose of providing benefits for the employing agency's 
food service operation and it is the responsibility of the recipient 
agency to demonstrate that the full value of all donated foods is used 
solely for the benefit of the recipient agency; and
    (2) The books and records of the food service management company 
pertaining to the food service operation of the agency shall be 
available for a period of three years from the close of the fiscal year 
to which they pertain.

All food service management contracts shall be subject to review by the 
distributing agency for compliance with requirements of this section in 
accordance with Sec. 250.19(b)(1). In the case of nonprofit summer camps 
for children, charitable institutions and nutrition programs for the 
elderly, the contract shall be in effect for no longer than one year and 
shall provide that it may be extended at the option of both parties for 
two additional one-year periods. Contracts may be terminated for cause 
by either party upon 30 days notice. At the time the contract is 
extended, the nonprofit summer camp for children, charitable institution 
or nutrition program for the elderly must update all pertinent 
information and must demonstrate that all donated food received during 
the previous contract period has been accounted for.
    (d) Storage facility contracts. When contracting for storage 
facilities, distributing agencies and subdistributing agencies shall 
enter into a written contract for the lease of storage facilities in 
accordance with Sec. 250.14(c).
    (e) Processing contracts. When contracting for the processing of 
donated foods, contracting agencies shall enter into agreements with 
processors in accordance with Sec. 250.30(c).


<R05>
Sec. 250.13   Distribution and control of donated foods.

    (a) Availability and use of donated foods--(1) General. (i) Donated 
foods shall be available only for distribution and use in accordance 
with the provisions of this part and, with respect to distribution to 
households on all or part of an Indian reservation, of parts 253 and 254 
of this chapter.
    (ii) Donated foods shall not be sold, exchanged or otherwise 
disposed of without the approval of the Department.
    (iii) Donated foods which are provided as part of an approved food 
package or authorized level of assistance may be transferred between 
like recipient agencies only with prior authorization of the 
distributing agency. Donated foods which are provided in addition to the 
State's authorized level of assistance may be transferred between 
recipient agencies which are eligible to

[[Page 384]]

receive such foods with the prior authorization of the distributing 
agency. However, the transfer of donated foods between unlike recipient 
agencies (e.g., from schools to charitable institutions), which have 
been provided as part of an approved food package or authorized level of 
assistance, must be approved by the appropriate FCSRO.
    (iv) Food donated under section 32 of Public Law 74-320 (7 U.S.C. 
612c) may also be transferred by recipient agencies to emergency feeding 
organizations which are distributing donated foods under part 251 of 
this chapter. A transfer between recipient agencies and emergency 
feeding organizations may be made only with the prior approval of the 
distributing agency and the State agency responsible for administering 
TEFAP.
    (v) All transfers of donated foods shall be documented. Such 
documentation shall be maintained in accordance with the recordkeeping 
requirements in Secs. 250.16 and 251.10(a) of this chapter.
    (2) Quantities. (i) The quantity of donated foods to be made 
available for donation under this part shall be determined in accordance 
with the pertinent legislation and the program obligations of the 
Department, and shall be such as can be effectively distributed to 
further the objectives of the pertinent legislation.
    (ii) Donated foods shall be requested and distributed only in 
quantities which can be consumed without waste in providing food 
assistance for persons eligible under this part. Distributing agencies 
shall impose similar restrictions on recipient agencies.
    (3) Minimum donations. Foods shall be donated only in such 
quantities as will protect the lower truck load freight rate, except as 
the Department determines to be in the best interest of the program.
    (4) Allocations. As foods become available for donation, FCS shall 
notify distributing agencies regarding the donated foods, the class or 
classes of recipient agencies or recipients eligible to receive them, 
and any special terms and conditions of donation and distribution which 
attach to a particular donated food, in addition to the general terms 
and conditions set forth herein.
    When a commodity is available in limited quantities, the Department 
shall allocate such commodities among the States using allocation 
percentages which are based on appropriate participation data for the 
program designated to receive the commodity.
    (5) Commodity value. Distributing agencies shall establish a value 
for each commodity for school food authorities and nonresidential child 
and adult care institutions for purposes of offering and crediting each 
recipient agency with the correct amount of commodities to fulfill 
planned commodity assistance levels (i.e., volume of commodities 
expected to be needed in order to meet the anticipated assistance at the 
local level, as determined by the distributing agency). Each commodity 
value shall be used consistently throughout the State to value 
commodities. The distributing agencies shall document and maintain on 
file for FCS review the method used to determine commodity values. 
Distributing agencies shall notify recipient agencies of the cost-per-
pound used to value commodities at the time a commodity is offered to 
recipient agencies. If the cost used to credit a commodity differs from 
the cost used to offer a commodity, distributing agencies shall also 
advise recipient agencies of the cost used to credit a commodity. To 
value a commodity offered to a recipient agency and to credit a 
commodity towards a recipient agency's planned commodity assistance 
level, distributing agencies shall use one of the following: The actual 
cost-per-pound data used to charge a State's commodity entitlement; the 
estimated cost-per-pound data provided by the Department; or the USDA 
commodity file cost as of a specified date. Actual cost data shall be 
defined as the cost-per-pound for an individual commodity charged to a 
State's entitlement on the Entitlement Food Order Report, which is based 
on the USDA purchase cost. Estimated cost data shall be defined as the 
cost provided by USDA on commodity survey memoranda. The USDA commodity 
file cost shall be defined as the cost that is listed for a commodity as 
of a date specified by the distributing agency.

[[Page 385]]

    (6) Announcement and delivery of commodities. The Department shall 
make every reasonable effort to arrange commodity deliveries based on 
information obtained from distributing agencies. However, the Department 
shall not be held fiscally responsible for any delay in delivering or 
for nondelivery of donated foods due to any cause. Distributing agencies 
shall maintain monthly distribution schedules which provide for 
equitable and reliable deliveries to recipient agencies, recognize local 
hours of operation, holidays and vacations and, whenever possible, other 
special needs of recipient agencies. Upon request by the recipient 
agency, the distributing agency may make deliveries less frequent than 
monthly when the distributing agency determines that monthly service is 
not cost effective, due to distance or the size of a food order, or 
other necessary reasons, such as seasonal school closures. Distributing 
agencies shall notify recipient agencies of:
    (i) General USDA purchase information at least quarterly;
    (ii) Anticipated State delivery schedules at least quarterly, 
including the types and quantities of commodities available; and
    (iii) Changes in delivery schedules when such changes affect the 
recipient agency.
    (7) Demonstrations and tests. Notwithstanding any other provision of 
this part, a quantity of any food donated for use by any recipient 
agency or recipient may be transferred by the distributing agency or by 
the recipient agency to bona fide experimental or testing agencies, or 
for use in workshops, or for demonstrations or tests relating to the 
utilization of such donated food by the recipient agency or recipient. 
No such transfer by any recipient agency shall be made without the 
approval of the appropriate distributing agency.
    (b) Processing and other costs. The Department shall pay such 
processing, reprocessing, transporting, handling and other charges 
accruing up to the time of transfer of title to distributing agencies as 
is deemed in the best interest of the Department.
    (c) Transfer of title. Title to donated foods shall pass to 
distributing agencies upon their acceptance of donated foods at time and 
place of delivery, limited, however, by the obligation of the 
distributing agency to use such donated foods for the purposes and upon 
the terms and conditions set forth in this part.
    (d) Distribution of donated foods to recipient agencies or 
recipients--(1) Distribution. Donated foods shall be distributed only to 
recipient agencies and recipients eligible to receive them under this 
part (see subpart D). Distributing agencies shall require that welfare 
agencies and disaster organizations distribute donated foods only to 
recipients eligible to receive them under this part. It shall not be 
deemed a failure to comply with the provisions of this part if recipient 
agencies serve meals containing donated foods to persons other than 
those who are eligible under this part, when such persons share common 
preparation, serving or dining facilities with eligible persons (needy 
persons, children, participants in nutrition programs for the elderly) 
and at least one of the following is true:
    (i) Such other persons are common beneficiaries with the eligible 
persons of the program of the recipient agency, or
    (ii) Such other persons are few in number compared to the eligible 
persons and receive their meals as an incident of their service to the 
eligible persons.

Such other persons include, but are not limited to teachers, disaster 
relief workers, and staff members. Nothing in this paragraph shall be 
construed as authorizing allocation or issuance of donated foods to 
recipient agencies in greater quantity than that authorized for the 
assistance of persons eligible under this part.
    (2) Normal food expenditures. Section 416 donated foods shall not be 
distributed to any recipient agencies or recipients whose normal food 
expenditures are reduced because of the receipt of donated foods.
    (e) Improper distribution, loss of or damage to donated foods. (1) 
If a distributing agency improperly distributes or uses any donated 
foods or causes loss of or damage to a donated food through its failure 
to provide proper storage,

[[Page 386]]

care or handling, the provisions set forth in Sec. 250.15(c) shall 
apply.
    (2) In instances when it is determined by a distributing agency that 
a claim exists against a subdistributing agency, recipient agency, 
warehouse, carrier, processor or other person, the distributing agency 
shall pursue claims in accordance with Sec. 250.15(c).
    (f) Disposition of damaged or out-of-condition foods. Donated foods 
which are found to be damaged or out-of-condition and are declared unfit 
for human consumption by Federal, State or local health officials, or by 
other inspection services or persons deemed competent by the Department, 
shall be disposed of in accordance with instructions of the Department. 
Such instructions may direct that unfit donated food be:
    (1) Sold in a manner prescribed by the Department with the net 
proceeds thereof remitted to the Department;
    (2) Sold in a manner prescribed by the Department with the proceeds 
thereof retained for use in accordance with the provisions of 
Sec. 250.15(f);
    (3) Used in such manner as will serve a useful purpose as determined 
by the Department; or
    (4) Destroyed in accordance with applicable sanitation laws and 
regulations.

Upon a finding by the Department that donated food are unfit for human 
consumption at the time of delivery to the distributing agency and when 
the Department or appropriate health officials require that such donated 
foods be destroyed, the Department may pay to the distributing agency 
any expenses incurred in connection with such donated foods as 
determined by the Department. The Department may, in any event, 
repossess damaged or out-of-condition donated foods.
    (g) Replacement of damaged commodities. (1) The Department shall 
replace donated foods received by distributing or recipient agencies 
when:
    (i) The distributing agency documents that the donated foods were 
stale, spoiled, out of condition or not in compliance with USDA 
specifications at the time they were delivered by the Department;
    (ii) The donated foods have been provided as part of the State's 
authorized level of assistance (entitlement) as established by law; or, 
when the donated foods have been provided in addition to the State's 
entitlement, but the total amount of the specific donated food which the 
distributing agency can order is limited by the Department;
    (iii) The loss is reported to the FCSRO within three months of the 
date the donated foods were received in the State, except that for 
canned commodities the reporting deadline shall be six months after 
receipt;
    (iv) A signed consignee receipt or acceptable written documentation 
of delivery is submitted to the FCSRO; and
    (v) At the request of the Department, the product has been 
reinspected and has been determined to be stale, spoiled, out of 
condition or not in compliance with USDA specifications.
    (2) In instances in which a recipient agency seeks replacement of 
donated foods, the recipient agency shall submit the information listed 
above to its distributing agency. The distributing agency shall promptly 
submit the information to the FCSRO.
    (3) Replacement by the vendor shall be made with either the same or 
similar food agreed to by the Department. Physical replacement shall be 
on a per-pound or per-case basis. In rare instances, and only with the 
approval of the Department, distributing agency and recipient agency, 
vendor replacement will be made with a cash payment to the recipient or 
distributing agency. Any such cash payments shall be used to purchase 
replacement commodities which are the same or similar to the original 
commodities. Cash payments shall be made on the basis of the dollar 
value established by the Department of the donated food at the time the 
product was delivered or the cost to the Department for replacement, 
whichever is higher.
    (4) Replacement by the Department shall be with either the same or 
similar food or by crediting the State's entitlement or cap. Physical 
replacement shall be on a per-pound or per-case basis. Entitlement or 
cap crediting shall be equal to the dollar value or the number of pounds 
which was deducted from the State's entitlement or cap for that 
shipment. The Department shall arrange for delivery of the replacement 
donated foods when the quantities to

[[Page 387]]

be delivered are sufficient to make it cost effective. Once the 
Department has replaced the donated foods, the distributing agency shall 
make arrangements for providing replacement donated foods to the 
recipient agency which incurred the loss.
    (5) In instances in which it is determined that the donated foods 
were in good condition at the time they were delivered by the 
Department, the cost of the reinspection shall be borne by the 
distributing agency and the distributing agency shall follow the claims 
procedures contained in Sec. 250.15(c) of this part and FCS Instruction 
410-1, Non-Audit Claims--FCS Distribution Program.
    (h) Redonations. Whenever a distributing agency has any donated food 
on hand which it cannot efficiently utilize, it shall immediately make a 
request to the appropriate FCSRO, in writing, for instructions as to the 
disposition of such donated food. Distributing agencies requesting 
authority from the Department to make redonation of any donated foods 
shall, upon the Department's request, have such donated foods federally 
inspected. Expenditures incurred by the distributing agency as a result 
of redonation shall be handled in accordance with Sec. 250.15(e).
    (i) Embezzlement, misuse, theft, or obtainment by fraud of donated 
foods and donated food-related funds, assets, or property. 
Notwithstanding paragraph (c) of this section concerning transfer of 
title to donated foods, whoever embezzles, willfully misapplies, steals, 
or obtains by fraud, donated foods or any funds, assets, or property 
deriving from donated foods or whoever receives, conceals, or retains 
such donated foods, funds, assets, or property for his/her own use or 
gain, knowing such donated foods, funds, assets, or property have been 
embezzled, willfully misapplied, stolen, or obtained by fraud shall be 
subject to Federal criminal prosecution under section 12(g) of the 
National School Lunch Act, as amended (42 U.S.C. 1760(g)) or section 
4(c) of the Agriculture and Consumer Protection Act of 1973, as amended 
(7 U.S.C. 612c note). For the purpose of this paragraph ``funds, assets, 
or property'' include, but are not limited to funds accruing from the 
sources identified in Sec. 250.15(f) (1) and (2), donated foods which 
have been processed into different end products as provided for under 
subpart C of this part, and the containers in which donated foods have 
been received from the Department. Distributing agencies shall 
immediately notify FCSRO of any suspected violation of section 12(g) or 
section 4(c) to allow the Department, in conjunction with the U.S. 
Department of Justice, to determine whether Federal criminal prosecution 
under section 12(g) or section 4(c) is warranted. Prosecution of 
violations by the Federal Government shall not relieve any distributing 
agency of its obligation to obtain recovery for improperly distributed 
or lost donated foods, as required by Sec. 250.15(c).
    (j) Commodity specifications. Distributing agencies shall make 
summaries of commodity specifications available to recipient agencies 
upon request.
    (k) Commodity acceptability reports. To ensure that the Department 
is kept apprised of the commodities and packaging that are preferred by 
recipients and participating agencies, information shall be collected as 
follows:
    (1) Information collection. Distributing agencies shall obtain 
information from recipient agencies which reflects:
    (i) The types and forms of donated foods that are most useful to 
recipients;
    (ii) Commodity specification recommendations; and
    (iii) Requests for options regarding package sizes and forms of 
commodities.
    (2) Samples and representation. The distributing agency shall 
collect information from recipient agencies from each of the following 
program categories: The National School Lunch Program, the Child and 
Adult Care Food Program, the Summer Food Service Program, the Nutrition 
Program for the Elderly, the Commodity Supplemental Food Program, 
charitable institutions, summer camps, the Food Distribution Program on 
Indian Reservations, and the Emergency Food Assistance Program. At a 
minimum, distributing agencies shall obtain this information from a 
sample of at least 10 percent or 100 recipient agencies in each program 
category, whichever is

[[Page 388]]

less. To ensure that the sample is representative of all recipient 
agencies, distributing agencies shall consider the size and geographic 
location of all recipient agencies within the State and alternate among 
them so that over time each recipient agency is provided an opportunity 
to express its views. Distributing agencies are encouraged to extract 
information regarding commodity acceptability from all available 
sources, including, for example, State Food Distribution Advisory 
Council Reports.
    (3) Timeframes for submission. Distributing agencies shall submit 
commodity acceptability reports to the appropriate FCSRO annually as 
requested on Form FCS-663. Reports for summer camps and the Summer Food 
Service Programs shall be submitted by November 30th of each year; all 
other reports shall be submitted by April 30th of each year.

[53 FR 20426, June 3, 1988, as amended at 53 FR 22469, June 16, 1988; 53 
FR 27475, July 21, 1988; 58 FR 39120, July 22, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 250.14  Warehousing, distribution and storage of donated foods.

    (a) Standards for Warehousing and Distribution Systems--(1) Use of 
cost efficient and effective facilities. Distributing agencies shall use 
the most cost effective and efficient system for providing warehousing 
and distribution services to recipient agencies. For the purpose of this 
part, commercial facilities are defined as enterprises that provide 
commercial warehousing services or commercial delivery services, or 
those commercial enterprises that provide both warehousing and delivery 
services.
    (2) Timeframes for evaluation. All distributing agencies shall 
evaluate their current warehousing and distribution systems. Initial 
evaluations shall be submitted to the FCSRO by June 30, 1990. Subsequent 
evaluations of noncommercial systems shall, at a minimum, be submitted 
to FCS every three years by March 31.
    (3) Evaluation of current systems. The evaluation of the system in 
place shall, at a minimum, include the following information:
    (i) A description of the principal warehousing/delivery techniques 
used by the distributing agency. The description should include:
    (A) The frequency of delivery available;
    (B) The timeframes for making deliveries;
    (C) The type of delivery service offered (to the loading dock or 
placement in the storeroom); and
    (D) The system for recipient agencies to order specific amounts of 
food from available inventory; and
    (ii) An estimate of all costs that will be incurred in administering 
the Food Distribution Program for the upcoming school year. These costs 
include transportation, storage and handling of donated foods (if the 
current distributing agency system does not include delivery to 
recipient agencies, identification of costs incurred by recipient 
agencies to pick up commodities at a warehouse and to deliver the food 
to a centralized storage facility or the individual preparation sites), 
salaries of persons directly connected with the administration of the 
program and other program related expenses. These expenses shall include 
fringe benefits, travel expenses, rent, utilities, accounting/auditing 
services to recipient agencies such as the costs for administering and 
monitoring the State's processing program, and technical assistance 
workshops.
    (4) Comparison of existing system with commercial systems. All 
distributing agencies which do not use commercial facilities for a basic 
level of warehousing and distribution services shall compare the cost of 
warehousing and distributing commodities under their current system with 
the cost of comparable services under a commercial system for the 
upcoming school year.
    (i) The cost comparison shall be made between the cost of providing 
a basic level of service under its current system and the cost of 
obtaining an equivalent level of service from commercial facilities. 
This basic level of service shall consist of the transportation, storage 
and handling of donated food from the time of delivery by the Department 
to a distributing agency until delivery to a recipient agency's 
centralized storage facility or individual preparation sites and shall 
include

[[Page 389]]

monthly deliveries of donated food to all recipient agencies except 
those that have agreed to less frequent deliveries.
    (ii) A distributing agency may base its cost comparison on a level 
of service in excess of the basic level and/or on services not currently 
provided. In all cases, the comparison must be made on the costs of 
providing a comparable level of service under the existing system (as 
identified in Sec. 250.14(a)(2)) versus a commercial system.
    (iii) If a distributing agency is unable to locate any commercial 
facilities expressing interest in providing the basic level of 
warehousing and distribution services, the distributing agency shall 
indicate this in its cost comparison submission, together with 
documentation of its efforts to obtain cost estimates from commercial 
facilities.
    (iv) All initial data regarding the cost of the current warehousing 
and distribution system and the cost for comparable commercial 
facilities shall be submitted to the FCSRO by June 30, 1990. Subsequent 
cost comparisons shall, at a minimum, be submitted to FCS once every 
three years by March 31.
    (5) Approval to use other systems. Distributing agencies that do not 
implement a commercial warehousing and distribution system shall apply 
to the FCSRO for approval to use other facilities and must demonstrate 
that other facilities are more cost effective and efficient. All 
requests for a waiver shall be accompanied with a full evaluation of the 
existing system complete with cost comparison data. Each request will be 
considered on a case by case basis. Initial requests for approval of 
alternative systems shall be submitted to the FCSRO by June 30, 1990. 
Subsequent requests shall, at a minimum, be submitted to the FCSRO once 
every three years by March 31.
    (6) System implementation. (i) Distributing agencies shall implement 
the most cost effective and efficient system for warehousing and 
distribution services to recipient agencies by July 1, 1991. Unless 
otherwise approved by the FCSRO, subsequent to July 1, 1991, a 
distributing agency shall convert to a commercial system within six 
months of:
    (A) The date of submission of evaluation and cost comparison data 
indicating that a commercial system is more cost effective and efficient 
(if no request for approval of an alternate system is made); or
    (B) The date of the denial of a request to use an alternative 
system.
    (ii) If at any time FCS determines that the warehousing and 
distribution system in place is not cost effective or efficient, the 
distributing agency will be required to reevaluate its system (including 
a cost comparison and request for continued approval to use an 
alternative system) in accordance with this subsection within 90 days of 
notification by the FCSRO.
    (7) Revisions in system. All distributing agencies (using either 
commercial or noncommercial systems) shall request approval from the 
FCSRO at least 90 days in advance of any planned reduction in the level 
of service provided or any increase in distribution charges beyond 
normal inflation. If FCS determines the proposed changes are 
inappropriate, FCS may require the distributing agency to submit 
additional justification, deny the request, or request a reevaluation of 
the system in accordance with paragraph (a)(6)(ii) of this section.
    (b) Standards for storage facilities. Distributing agencies, 
subdistributing agencies and recipient agencies shall provide facilities 
for the handling, storage and distribution of donated foods which:
    (1) Are sanitary and free from rodent, bird, insect and other animal 
infestation;
    (2) Safeguard against theft, spoilage and other loss;
    (3) Maintain foods at proper storage temperatures;
    (4) Stock and space foods in a manner so that USDA-donated foods are 
readily identified;
    (5) Store donated food off the floor in a manner to allow for 
adequate ventilation; and
    (6) Take other protective measures as may be necessary.

Distributing agencies, subdistributing agencies and recipient agencies 
shall ensure that storage facilities have obtained all required Federal, 
State and/

[[Page 390]]

or local health inspections and/or approvals and that such inspection/
approvals are current.
    (c) Reviews. All distributing agency-level storage facilities shall 
be reviewed annually. Distributing agencies shall ensure that 
subdistributing and recipient agencies. Conduct annual reviews of their 
respective storage facilities. Documentation shall be maintained on file 
at the distributing agency or local level as appropriate to reflect 
compliance with this section, including documentation of corrective 
action in cases of noncompliance. Corrective action must be taken 
immediately on all deficiencies identified in the review and the result 
of the corrective action must be forwarded to the distributing agency. 
Where applicable, the distributing agency shall determine and pursue 
claims in accordance with Sec. 250.15(c).
    (d) Contracts. When contracting for storage facilities, distributing 
agencies and subdistributing agencies shall enter into written contracts 
to be effective for no longer than one year. The contract may be 
extended at the option of both parties for two additional one year 
periods. At the time the contract is extended, the storage facility must 
update all pertinent information and demonstrate that all donated foods 
received during the previous contract period have been accounted for. 
The contract shall, at a minimum, contain the following:
    (1) Assurance that the storage facilities will be maintained in 
accordance with the standards specified in paragraph (a) of this 
section;
    (2) Evidence that donated food shall be clearly identified;
    (3) Assurance that an inventory system shall be maintained and an 
annual physical inventory will be conducted; and reconciled with the 
inventory records;
    (4) Beginning and ending dates of the contract;
    (5) A provision for immediate termination of the contract due to 
noncompliance on the part of the warehouse management;
    (6) A provision allowing for termination of the contract for cause 
by either party upon 30 days written notification;
    (7) The amount of any insurance coverage, which has been purchased 
to protect the value of food items which are being stored; and
    (8) Express written consent for inspection and inventory by the 
distributing agency, subdistributing agency, recipient agency, the 
Comptroller General, the Department or any of their duly authorized 
representatives.
    (e) Physical inventory. During the annual review required by 
Sec. 250.14(b), distributing agencies, subdistributing agencies and 
recipient agencies shall take a physical inventory of all storage 
facilities. Such inventory shall be reconciled annually with the storage 
facility's inventory records and maintained on file by the agency which 
contracted with or maintained the storage facility. Food items which 
have been lost, stolen or found to be out-of-condition shall be 
identified during the physical inventory and reported by the 
subdistributing or recipient agency to the distributing agency. 
Potential excessive inventory, as described in paragraph (e) of this 
section, shall be reported by the subdistributing or recipient agency to 
the distributing agency. Corrective action shall be taken immediately on 
all deficiencies and inventory discrepancies and the results of the 
corrective action forwarded to the distributing agency. Where 
applicable, the distributing agency shall determine and pursue claims in 
accordance with Sec. 250.15(c).
    (f) Excessive inventories. (1) The distributing agency shall 
determine if a subdistributing or recipient agency's inventories are 
excessive based on:
    (i) The rate of distribution;
    (ii) Anticipated distribution; and
    (iii) Other concerns such as logistical and economic considerations.
    (2) In no case may the inventory level of each donated food in 
storage exceed a six-month supply unless sufficient justification for 
additional inventory has been submitted and approved. Subdistributing 
agencies and recipient agencies shall submit justification to the 
distributing agency in instances where more than a six-month inventory 
is needed. Justification shall be submitted by the distributing agency 
to the FCSRO for approval in instances

[[Page 391]]

where more than a six-month inventory is needed at the distributing 
agency level.
    (3) The distributing agency shall take corrective action to ensure 
that excess inventories at all levels are eliminated and shall document 
actions taken to reduce excessive inventories.

[53 FR 20426, June 3, 1988, as amended at 54 FR 42475, Oct. 17, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 250.15  Financial management.

    (a) Distribution charges. (1) Recipient agencies may be required to 
pay part or all of the direct costs for intrastate storage and 
distribution of donated food through distribution charges assessed by 
the distributing or subdistributing agency, except as provided in 
paragraph (a)(2) of this section.
    (i) Distributing and subdistributing agencies assessing distribution 
charges shall submit a description of their system with all data used in 
calculating the rate to be used for the upcoming school year to the 
FCSRO for approval. The initial description and data shall be submitted 
by June 30, 1990. Updates to this information shall, at a minimum, be 
submitted to the FCSRO for approval every three years by March 31.
    (ii) At least 90 days before increasing distribution charges beyond 
normal inflation, the distributing/subdistributing agency shall submit 
to the FCSRO a description of the change together with all data used to 
calculate the change. FCS will take action on the proposed increase in 
accordance with paragraph (a)(1)(v) of this section.
    (iii) Allowable costs include but are not limited to those program 
costs referenced in paragraph (f)(2) of this section, i.e. 
transportation, storage and handling of donated foods, salaries of 
persons directly connected with the administration of the program and 
other program related expenses. Examples of other program related 
expenses are administrative costs such as fringe benefits, travel 
expenses, rent, utilities, accounting/auditing services, computer 
services, and the costs of providing program services to recipient 
agencies such as the cost for administering and monitoring the State's 
processing program, and technical assistance workshops.
    (iv) Distribution charges shall not be assessed for costs which 
would be unallowable under the Cost Principles in the Department's 
Uniform Federal Assistance Regulations, 7 CFR part 3015, subpart T. In 
no case may distribution charges be assessed for costs which are paid 
for by State Administrative Expense (SAE) funds, State or local 
appropriated funds or any other funds available to the distributing or 
subdistributing agency to administer the program. Distribution charges 
shall not be based on a percentage of the value of the commodities 
distributed.
    (v) FCS shall review the information and inform the distributing 
agency of the appropriateness of its distribution charges. If it is 
determined that a distributing agency's proposed distribution charges 
are excessive or incorporate inappropriate costs, the distributing/
subdistributing agency will be required to adjust the distribution 
charges to reflect an appropriate level or submit further justification 
sufficient to satisfy the FCSRO that the proposed distribution charges 
are essential to cover allowable costs and services. This further 
justification shall include information from recipient agencies 
regarding their satisfaction with services provided.
    (vi) Distribution charges, including any excess distribution charges 
which may accrue (as defined in paragraph (f)(4) of this section) shall 
be used in accordance with provisions of paragraph (f) of this section.
    (2) Whenever a commodity is donated to a State without charge or 
credit against entitlement, recipient agencies may not be assessed for 
any part of the intrastate costs of storage and transportation of such 
commodity that is in excess of the distributing or subdistributing 
agency's direct costs for such storage and transportation minus any 
amount that the Department provides to the State to pay such costs under 
part 251 of this chapter.
    (3) Under no circumstances shall recipients be required to make any 
payments in money, materials, or services for or in connection with the 
receipt of donated foods, nor shall voluntary contributions be solicited 
(except for the nutrition programs for the elderly) in

[[Page 392]]

connection with the receipt of donated foods for any purpose.
    (b) Sale of containers. When containers or packing materials in 
which donated foods are received are disposed of by sale, the proceeds 
of such sale shall be used solely in accordance with the provisions of 
paragraph (f)(2) of this section.
    (c) Claims. If a distributing agency improperly distributes or uses 
any donated foods, or causes loss of or damage to a donated food through 
its failure to provide proper storage, care, or handling, the 
distributing agency shall, at the Department's option.
    (1) Replace the donated food in its distribution program in kind, 
or, in the case of section 6 donated foods, where replacement in kind 
may not be practicable, with other similar foods, or
    (2) Pay to the Department the value of the donated food as 
determined by the Department.

Upon the happening of any event creating a claim in favor of a 
distributing agency against a subdistributing agency, recipient agency, 
warehouseman, carrier or other person, for the improper distribution, 
use, or loss of, or damage to, a donated food, the distributing agency 
shall take action to obtain recovery. All amounts collected by such 
action shall, at the Department's option, be used in accordance with the 
provisions of paragraph (c)(1) of this section, or, except for amounts 
collected on claims involving section 6 donated foods, shall be expended 
for program purposes in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (f) 
of this section. Determinations by a distributing agency that a claim 
has or has not arisen in favor of the distributing agency against a 
subdistributing agency, recipient agency, warehouseman, carrier or other 
person, shall, at the option of the Department, be approved by the 
Department prior to the distributing agency taking action thereon. Where 
prior approval has not been given by the Department, a distributing 
agency's claim determinations shall be subject to review by the 
Department. In the case of an inventory shortage, when the loss of any 
one commodity does not exceed one percent of the total quantity of the 
donated food distributed or utilized from any single storage facility 
during the fiscal year in which the loss occurred, or during the period 
for which an audit was conducted by representatives of the Department, 
or, if approved by FCS, during the period for which an audit was 
conducted by the distributing agency, if the distributing agency finds 
that: (i) The cause of the shortage cannot be established, (ii) the lost 
donated foods were held in non-commercial storage or other facilities 
owned or operated by the distributing agency, a subdistributing agency 
or a recipient agency, and (iii) there is no indication that the loss 
was the result of negligence or continued inefficiency in operations, 
the distributing agency need not take any further claims action, but the 
factual basis for not taking further claims action shall be subject to 
review by the Department. Furthermore, distributing agencies shall not 
be required to file or pursue a claim for a loss which does not exceed 
an amount established by State law, regulations, or procedure as a 
minimum amount for which a claim will be made for State losses 
generally, but no such claim shall be disregarded where there is 
evidence of violation of Federal or State statutes. Distributing 
agencies which fail to pursue claims arising in their favor, or fail to 
provide for the right to assert such claims, or fail to require their 
subdistributing agencies and recipient agencies to provide for such 
rights in accordance with Sec. 250.12(b), shall be responsible to the 
Department for replacing the donated foods or paying the value thereof 
in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (c)(1) or (2) of this 
section. Distributing agencies which pursue claims arising in their 
favor, but fail to obtain full restitution shall not be liable to the 
Department for any deficiency unless the Department determines that the 
distributing agency fraudulently or negligently failed to take 
reasonable action to obtain restitution. The Department may, at its 
option, require assignment to it of any claim arising from the 
distribution of donated foods.
    (d) Demurrage. Demurrage or other charges which accrue after a car 
or truck has been placed for unloading by the delivering carrier, or 
which accrue because placement of a car or truck is

[[Page 393]]

prevented, shall be borne by the distributing agency, except that 
demurrage or other charges may be borne by the Department where such 
charges accrue because of actions by the Department and without the 
fault or negligence of the distributing agency.
    (e) Redonation expenditures. In accordance with Sec. 250.13(g), 
whenever a distributing agency requests authority to make redonation of 
any donated foods and the Department requests that the donated foods be 
federally inspected, these inspections will be made at the expense of 
the distributing agency. Any donated foods which the Department 
determines are acceptable for redonation shall be moved at the 
distributing agency's expense to the closest point within the FCS region 
in which the State is located where it can be utilized, or to a closer 
point outside the region, if such a transfer is mutually agreed to by 
the Department and the distributing agency. In those instances in which 
the distributing agency satisfactorily demonstrates to the Department 
that the need for any redonation resulted from no fault or negligence on 
its part, the Department shall assume such transportation costs as it 
determines to be proper. Whenever a redonation is made at the request of 
the Department, the Department shall pay all transportation and handling 
costs in connection with such redonation and shall pay to the 
distributing agency all storage and handling costs accrued on the 
donated foods at the time of redonation, as determined by the 
Department, except when the request is made as a result of negligence on 
the part of the distributing agency.
    (f) Use of funds accruing in operation of the program. (1) Funds 
accruing from claims. Funds accruing from recoveries from loss or damage 
claims (which are authorized under paragraph (c) of this section to be 
expended for program purposes) shall be used only for the payment of 
expenses of the food distributing program, including transportation, 
storage and handling or donated foods, salaries of persons directly 
connected with the program, and other administrative expenses. In 
accordance with paragraph (f)(4) of this section, the receipt and 
expenditure of funds so accrued shall be reviewed by the distributing 
agency to determine that fund balances are not in excess of program 
needs.
    (2) Other funds. Funds accruing from the sale of containers, packing 
materials, salvage of donated foods, distribution charges, or insurance 
shall be returned to the Department or used only for the payment of 
expenses of the program which will improve program operations including, 
but not limited to, transportation, storage and handling of donated 
foods, salaries of persons directly connected with the program and other 
program-related expenses. Funds accruing from the collection of 
distribution charges which are determined to be in excess of program 
needs pursuant to paragraph (f)(4) of this section shall be used in 
accordance with that paragraph. Funds accruing from the operation of the 
program shall not be used for those costs which are unallowable under 
the cost Principles in the Department's Uniform Federal Assistance 
Regulations, 7 CFR part 3015, subpart T. These unallowable costs 
include, but are not limited to:
    (i) Bad debts;
    (ii) Contingencies;
    (iii) Contributions and donations;
    (iv) Entertainment;
    (v) Fines and penalties;
    (vi) Governor's expenses;
    (vii) Interest and other financial costs;
    (viii) Legislative expenses; and
    (ix) Losses on other grants.
    (3) Segregation of funds. Distributing agencies and subdistributing 
agencies shall maintain two separate accounts for funds accruing from 
program operations. Funds accruing from the collection of distribution 
charges shall be maintained in an operating account. Funds accruing from 
the sale of containers, salvage of foods, insurance and recoveries of 
claims for the loss or damage of donated foods shall be maintained in a 
salvage account.
    (4) Excess funds. The distributing agency shall review the receipt 
and expenditures of funds annually to ensure that fund balances are not 
in excess of program needs. At a maximum, the operating account fund 
shall not exceed the sum of the previous year's highest

[[Page 394]]

three-month expenditures. Funds exceeding this maximum shall be 
considered in excess of program needs unless the distributing agency 
provides sufficient justification as to the need for such funds and 
receives approval from the FCSRO. FCSRO may determine that funds equal 
to or less than the expenditures for the previous year's highest three 
months are in excess of what is needed. In such instances, the 
distributing agency shall reduce the excess funds in the operating 
account by reducing distributing charges or returning the funds to the 
contributor. The salvage account will have no set limit. FCSRO must, 
however, give prior approval to each deposit to or expenditure from the 
salvage fund which is in excess of $2,500. The distributing agency shall 
impose upon subdistributing agencies and recipient agencies similar 
provisions for the use of such funds accruing from the operation of 
their programs.

[53 FR 20426, June 3, 1988, as amended at 54 FR 42476, Oct. 17, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 250.16  Maintenance of records.

    (a) General requirements. (1) Accurate and complete records shall be 
maintained with respect to the receipt, distribution/use and inventory 
of donated foods including:
    (i) End products processed from donated foods and
    (ii) The determination made as to liability for any improper 
distribution, use of, loss of, or damage to, such foods and the results 
obtained from the pursuit of claims by the distributing agency.

Such records shall also be maintained with respect to the receipt and 
disbursement of funds arising from the operation of the distribution 
program, including the determination as to the amount of payments to be 
made by any processor, upon termination of processing contracts.
    (2) Distributing agencies shall require all subdistributing and 
recipient agencies to maintain accurate and complete records with 
respect to the receipt, distribution/disposal and inventory of donated 
foods, including end products processed from donated foods, and with 
respect to any funds which arise from the operation of the distribution 
program, including refunds made to recipient agencies by processors in 
accordance with Sec. 250.30(k).
    (3) Unless a distributing agency maintains an offer-and-acceptance 
system in accordance with Sec. 250.48(e), the distributing agency shall 
maintain accurate and complete records with respect to amounts and value 
of commodities refused by school food authorities. School food 
authorities shall also be required to maintain such records of refusals.
    (4) Each processor, food service management company, warehouse, or 
other entity which contracts with a distributing agency, subdistributing 
agency or recipient agency shall be required to keep accurate and 
complete records with respect to the receipt, distribution/disposal, 
storage and inventory of such foods similar to those required of 
distributing agencies under this paragraph. Where donated foods have 
been commingled with commercial foods, the processor shall maintain 
records which permit an accurate determination of the donated-food 
inventory. The processor shall also be required to keep formula, 
recipes, daily or batch production records, loadout sheets, bills of 
lading, and other processing and shipping records to substantiate the 
use made of such foods and their subsequent redelivery, in whatever 
form, to any distributing agency, subdistributing agency or recipient 
agency. Processors must maintain records which will permit a 
determination regarding compliance with the contracting provisions 
required by Sec. 250.30(f) (3) and (4) as well as maintain records used 
as the basis for compiling the processor performance reports required by 
Sec. 250.30(m).
    (5) All recipient agencies shall be required to keep accurate and 
complete records showing the data and method used to determine the 
number of eligible persons served by that agency.
    (6) Failure by a distributing agency, subdistributing agency, 
recipient agency, processor, food service management company, warehouse 
or other entity to maintain records required by this Section shall be 
considered prima facie evidence of improper distribution or loss of 
donated foods and the agency,

[[Page 395]]

processor or entity shall be subject to the provisions of 
Sec. 250.13(e).
    (b) Length of maintenance. All records required by this Section 
shall be retained for a period of three years from the close of the 
fiscal year to which they pertain. However, in instances when claims 
action and/or audit findings have not been resolved, the records shall 
be retained as long as required for the resolution of such action or 
findings.


<R05>
Sec. 250.17  Reports.

    (a) Monthly Report of Receipt and Distribution of Donated Foods 
(FCS-155). Distributing agencies shall complete and submit to the FCSRO 
monthly inventory reports covering the receipt and distribution of 
donated foods on Form FCS-155 or other format approved by FCS. The 
report shall be submitted no later than 30 calendar days after the end 
of the reporting month. The distributing agency shall submit a list of 
individual food orders received for each food item delivered by the 
Department as an attachment to the FCS-155.
    (b) Processing inventory reports. Distributing agencies shall 
complete and submit a quarterly processing inventory report in 
accordance with Sec. 250.30(o).
    (c) Performance reports. Monthly reports of performance shall be 
submitted by processors to distributing agencies in accordance with 
Sec. 250.30(m).
    (d) Commodity acceptability reports. Distributing agencies shall 
submit to the FCSRO reports relative to the types and forms of donated 
foods which are most useful to recipient agencies in accordance with 
Sec. 250.13(k) of this part.
    (e) Other reports. Distributing agencies shall complete and submit 
other reports relative to distribution operations in such form as may be 
required from time to time by the Department.
    (f) Report transmission. Where a report is to be postmarked by a 
specific date and such report is transmitted by means of a facsimile 
machine, the date printed by the facsimile machine on the facsimile copy 
may serve as the postmark.

(Reporting requirements contained in paragraph (a) approved by the 
Office of Management and Budget under control number 0584-0001. 
Reporting requirements contained in paragraph (e) approved by the Office 
of Management and Budget under control numbers 0584-0028, 0584-0109, 
0584-0288 and 0584-0293)

[53 FR 20426, June 3, 1988, as amended at 53 FR 27476, July 21, 1988; 59 
FR 62983, Dec. 7, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 250.18  Audits.

    (a) Right of inspection and audit. The Secretary, the Comptroller 
General of the United States, or any of their duly authorized 
representatives, may inspect and inventory donated foods in storage or 
the facilities used in the handling or storage of such donated foods, 
and may inspect and audit all records, including financial records, and 
reports pertaining to the distribution of donated foods and may review 
or audit the procedures and methods used in carrying out the 
requirements of this part at any reasonable time. Subdistributing 
agencies, recipient agencies, processors, food service management 
companies and warehouses shall be required to permit similar inspection 
and audit by such entities or their representatives. Fiscal matters 
shall continue to be reviewed in audits under the Single Audit Act (31 
U.S.C. 7501-07) and the Department's Uniform Federal Assistance 
Regulations (7 CFR part 3015).
    (b) Independent CPA audits of multi-State processors. (1) For any 
year in which a multi-State processor receives more than $250,000 in 
donated foods, the processor shall obtain an independent CPA (certified 
public accountant) audit for that year. Multi-State processors which 
receive $75,000 to $250,000 in donated food each year shall obtain an 
independent CPA audit every two years and those which receive less than 
$75,000 in donated foods each year shall obtain an independent CPA audit 
every three years. Those multi-State processors which are in the two or 
three-year audit cycle shall move into the next audit cycle at the point 
in time in

[[Page 396]]

which the value of donated foods received reaches $75,000 or $250,000 in 
any year. The total value of donated food received shall be computed by 
adding the value of food received under State and National Commodity 
Processing contracts. In instances in which the Department determines 
that the audit is not acceptable or that the audit has disclosed serious 
deficiencies, the processor shall be subject to additional audits at the 
request of FCS.
    (2) Audits shall be conducted in accordance with the auditing 
provisions set forth under the Uniform Federal Assistance Regulations (7 
CFR part 3015, subpart I) and the FCS Audit Guide for Multi-State 
Processors. At the discretion of FCS, auditors will be required to 
attend training sessions conducted by the Department.
    (3) The costs of the audits, including those costs associated with 
training, shall be borne by the processors.
    (4) Audit findings relative to those elements associated with the 
processing of donated food shall be submitted to the processor and to 
FCS concurrently.
    (5) Noncompliance with the audit requirements in paragraph (b)(1) of 
this section will render the processor ineligible to enter into another 
processing contract with any contracting agency until the required audit 
has been conducted and deficiencies corrected.
    (6) Processor response. Multi-State processors shall develop a 
written response to FCS addressing deficiencies which have been 
identified in the audit. Such responses shall include:
    (i) Corrective action which has already been taken to eliminate the 
deficiency;
    (ii) Corrective action which the processor proposes to take to 
eliminate the deficiency;
    (iii) The timeframes for the implementation and completion of the 
corrective action;
    (iv) A determination of what caused the deficiency; and
    (v) Deficiencies which have been identified that the processor takes 
exception to and an explanation for the exception.

Multi-State processors shall submit a written response to FCS in 
accordance with timeframes established by FCS.

[53 FR 20426, June 3, 1988, as amended at 54 FR 7525, Feb. 22, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 250.19  Reviews.

    (a) General. Each distributing agency shall establish a review 
system in order to assess the effectiveness of its food distribution 
program in meeting the requirements of these regulations.
    (b) Responsibilities of distributing agencies. (1) Each distributing 
agency shall establish review procedures encompassing eligibility, food 
ordering procedures, storage practices, inventory controls, reporting 
and recordkeeping requirements and compliance with nondiscrimination 
provisions. The procedures shall include:
    (i) An on-site review of all charitable institutions, nutrition 
programs for the elderly and nonprofit summer camps for children under 
agreement in accordance with Sec. 250.12(b) at least once every 4 years, 
with not fewer than 25 percent of each of these recipient agency 
categories being reviewed each year. These reviews shall also include 
on-site reviews of storage facilities to ensure compliance with 
Sec. 250.14(a);
    (ii) An on-site review at least once every 2 years of all processors 
except those that are multi-State processors as defined in Sec. 250.3, 
with no fewer than 50 percent being reviewed each year;
    (iii) An annual on-site review of each storage facility utilized by 
the distributing agency. On-site reviews conducted by FCS may be 
considered as contributing to the fulfillment of the minimum coverage 
required by this paragraph; and
    (iv) A biennial review of all food service management companies 
under contract with recipient agencies in accordance with Sec. 250.12(c) 
which are not under contract with a school participating in the National 
School Lunch Program or a Commodity School under part 210 of this 
chapter, or a school participating in the School Breakfast Program under 
part 220 of this chapter.
    (2) Each distributing agency shall design and implement a system to 
verify sales of end products to all recipient agencies under that 
distributing agency's authority in instances when a

[[Page 397]]

processor transfers end products to a distributor and the distributor 
sells the end product to the recipient agencies at a discount and the 
distributor receives a refund from the processor. At a minimum, such a 
system must:
    (i) At a minimum, provide for a semi-annual review of a 
statistically valid sample of sales for the previous six-month period 
for all processors which contract with the distributing agency or 
contracting agencies under the authority of the distributing agency, 
including multi-State processors. The sample size must ensure a 95 
percent confidence level;
    (ii) Support the projection of a claim against the processor when, 
in the review of the sample, it is determined that the value of donated 
foods has not been passed on to recipient agencies or when end products 
have been improperly distributed; and
    (iii) Provide for the assessment of claims against the processor in 
accordance with FCS Instruction 410-1, Non-Audit Claims, Food 
Distribution Program, in instances when deficiences have been 
identified.
    (iv) Provide for the adjustment of performance reports and 
processing inventory reports to refect any invalid sales;
    (v) Provide for the development and submission by processors to the 
distributing agency of a corrective action plan designed to correct 
problems identified during the sales verification; and
    (vi) In instances in which the distributing agency has delegated the 
responsibility of sales verification to processors, the distributing 
agency must:
    (A) Establish guidelines which ensure that the criteria contained in 
paragraphs (b)(2)(i)-(v) are met;
    (B) Ensure that processors report their findings to the distributing 
agency on a semi-annaul basis in accordance with Sec. 250.30(m);
    (C) Review the processor's findings and select a random sub-sample 
of at least 10 percent of all sales verified by the processor and 
reverify the sale by contacting the recipient agency by telephone or 
through written correspondence; and
    (D) Submit a copy of the processor's review report and findings and 
the results of the reverification efforts to the appropriate FCSRO. In 
instances of poor processor performance, the distributing agency shall 
require the processor to discontinue the abused value pass-through-
system, initiate an audit or review to determine the extent to which 
sales are to be disallowed, establish a claim, and/or terminate the 
contract.
    (3) The distributing agency shall submit a report of review findings 
to each entity reviewed. The report shall include:
    (i) Each deficiency found;
    (ii) The factors contributing to each deficiency;
    (iii) Recommendations for needed corrective action, including 
timetables for completion and/or claims action to be pursued, if any; 
and
    (iv) Provisions for evaluating effectiveness of corrective actions.

A copy of each processor review report shall be provided to the 
appropriate FCSRO.
    (4) Distributing agencies shall monitor progress toward completion 
and the effectiveness of corrective actions taken in eliminating program 
deficiences.
    (5) In addition to the review requirements of paragraph (b)(1) of 
this section, each distributing agency shall make a continuing 
evaluation of all recipient agencies, and processors by monitoring 
performance reports, food requests, participation data, and data 
regarding refunds and discounts to recipient agencies and distributors 
for the receipt of end products.
    (6) Distributing agencies shall, where applicable, require that 
subdistributing agencies monitor and review their operations in 
accordance with this paragraph.
    (c) Corrective action plans. Corrective action plans shall be 
submitted whenever a distributing agency is found by the FCSRO to be 
substantially out of compliance with a performance standard or any other 
provision of this part. The corrective action plan shall identify the 
corrective actions and the timeframes needed to correct the deficiencies 
found by the FCSRO. The plan shall be written, signed by the proper 
official in the State, and submitted to the FCSRO within 60 days after 
the distributing agency receives notification

[[Page 398]]

from the FCSRO of a deficiency. Extensions beyond 60 days may be made, 
for cause, with written justification to and approved by the FCSRO.
    (d) Responsibilities of State Agencies on Aging. State Agencies on 
Aging which receive cash payments in lieu of donated foods in accordance 
with the provisions of Sec. 250.42(c) shall monitor use of such cash 
after disbursement to nutrition programs for the elderly to ensure that 
the amounts so received are expended solely for the purchase of U.S. 
agricultural commodities and other foods of U.S. origin for such 
programs.

[53 FR 20426, June 3, 1988, as amended at 54 FR 7525, Feb. 22, 1989, 54 
FR 25564, June 16, 1989; 54 FR 42477, Oct. 17, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 250.20  Sanctions.

    Any distributing agency which has failed to comply with the 
provisions of this part or any instructions or procedures issued in 
connection with it or any agreements entered into pursuant to it, may, 
at the discretion of the Department, be disqualified from further 
participation in any distribution program. Reinstatement may be made at 
the option of the Department. Disqualification shall not prevent the 
Department from taking other action through other available means when 
considered necessary, including prosecution under applicable Federal 
statutes.


<R05>
Sec. 250.21  Civil rights.

    Distributing agencies, subdistributing agencies and recipient 
agencies shall comply with the Department's nondiscrimination 
regulations (7 CFR parts 15, 15a, and 15b) and the FCS civil rights 
instructions to ensure that in the operation of the program no person is 
discriminated against because of race, color, national origin, age, sex 
or handicap.


<R05>
Sec. 250.22  Complaints.

    Distributing agencies shall investigate promptly complaints received 
in connection with the distribution or use of donated foods. 
Irregularities which are disclosed shall be corrected immediately. 
Serious irregularities shall be promptly reported to the Department. 
Distributing agencies shall maintain or file evidence of such 
investigations and actions. The Department also reserves the right to 
make investigations and shall have the final determination as to when a 
complaint has been properly handled. Complaints alleged on the basis of 
race, color, national origin, age, sex or handicap shall be handled in 
accordance with Sec. 250.21.


<R05>
Sec. 250.23  Buy American.

    (a) Purchase requirements. When purchasing food products with 
Federal funds, whenever possible, recipient agencies shall purchase only 
food products that are produced in the United States (U.S.). Food 
products produced in the U.S. means:
    (1) An unmanufactured food product produced in the U.S.; or
    (2) A food product that is manufactured in the U.S.
    (b) Exceptions. The purchase requirements described in paragraph (a) 
of this section shall not apply in instances when the recipient agency 
determines: (1) Recipients have unusual or ethnic food preferences which 
can only be met through purchases of products not produced in the U.S.; 
(2) the product is not produced or manufactured in the U.S. in 
sufficient and reasonably available quantities of a satisfactory 
quality; (3) the cost of U.S. produced food products is significantly 
higher than foreign products, or (4) the recipient agency is located in 
Alaska, Hawaii, Guam, American Samoa, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, 
or the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.

[53 FR 27476, July 21, 1988, as amended at 58 FR 39122, July 22, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 250.24  Distributing agency performance standards.

    This section establishes basic performance standards which must be 
followed by distributing agencies responsible for intrastate 
distribution of donated commodities and products. The seven standards 
address the level of service that shall be provided to recipient 
agencies. The basic standards include the following:
    (a) Program management and evaluation. Distributing agencies shall 
conduct reviews in accordance with Sec. 250.19. Distributing agencies 
shall also

[[Page 399]]

assess the adequacy of the service provided to recipient agencies.
    (b) Information dissemination. Distributing agencies shall provide 
recipient agencies with all information needed for informed 
participation in the program. Distributing agencies shall provide 
program information relative to:
    (1) Current program regulations,
    (2) Summaries of commodity specifications upon request 
(Sec. 250.13(j)) and commodity fact sheets,
    (3) Results of any test evaluations and surveys,
    (4) Advisory council membership recommendations,
    (5) Recipes, and
    (6) Written procedures for ordering commodities, handling 
commodities which are stale, spoiled, out-of-condition or not in 
compliance with specifications (including procedures for replacement by 
the Department under Sec. 250.13(g)), submitting complaints and other 
written policy which affects program operations.
    (c) Fiscal responsibility. Distributing agencies shall maintain a 
financial management system which ensures fiscal integrity and 
accountability for all funds and includes a recordkeeping system which 
conforms to generally accepted accounting practices. Distributing 
agencies shall submit information relative to distribution charges to 
FCS in accordance with Sec. 250.15(a).
    (d) Ordering and allocation. Distributing agencies shall ensure that 
donated food is provided on an equitable basis and, to the extent 
practicable, in the types and forms most usable by recipient agencies. 
Distributing agencies shall be responsible for:
    (1) Obtaining and utilizing semi-annual commodity acceptability 
information in accordance with Sec. 250.13(k);
    (2) Providing recipient agencies with information regarding 
commodity availability;
    (3) Providing recipient agencies with information regarding 
commodity assistance levels;
    (4) Ordering and allocating donated food based on participation data 
for those programs which serve meals;
    (5) Ensuring the availability of commodities, to the extent 
possible, in quantities requested and at times specified by recipient 
agencies;
    (6) Permitting recipient agencies to refuse all or a portion of a 
commodity prior to delivery to the distributing agency if time permits;
    (7) Permitting recipient agencies to change orders for Group B 
(grain, dairy, peanut and oil products) and unlimited bonus commodities 
prior to submission of an order to the Department;
    (8) Providing recipient agencies with ordering options and commodity 
values (Sec. 250.13(a)(5));
    (9) Offering schools participating in the National School Lunch 
Program the per meal value of donated food in accordance with 
Sec. 250.48(c); and
    (10) Consider the preparation and storage capabilities of recipient 
agencies when ordering donated food, including capabilities of such 
agencies to handle commodity product forms, quantity, packaging and 
quantities.
    (e) Warehousing and distribution. Distributing agencies shall use a 
warehousing and distribution system that is efficient, cost effective 
and responsive to needs of recipient agencies in accordance with 
Sec. 250.14(a). In addition, distributing agencies shall:
    (1) Work with recipient agencies capable of receiving direct 
shipments to order donated food directly into their warehouses;
    (2) Solicit information and recommendations regarding the individual 
delivery needs of recipient agencies;
    (3) Maintain distribution schedules which are equitable and 
reliable, recognize hours of operation, holidays and vacations and other 
special needs of recipient agencies;
    (4) And make donated food available at least monthly to all 
recipient agencies except those that have agreed to less frequent 
deliveries (Sec. 250.13(a)(6)); however, the distributing agency shall 
not be held liable for delays in deliveries of donated food when such 
delays are due to late deliveries of donated food to the distributing 
agency by the Department.
    (f) Disposition of damaged or out-of-condition commodities. 
Distributing agencies shall establish a system for handling recipient 
agency complaints, notifying the Department of any commodity losses in 
accordance with

[[Page 400]]

Sec. 250.13(f) and arranging for the replacement of lost commodities in 
accordance with Sec. 250.13(g).
    (g) Processing. Distributing agencies shall administer an acceptable 
processing program in accordance with Sec. 250.30. In addition, 
distributing agencies shall inform recipient agencies annually of 
processing options available to them in facilitating participation in 
State or National processing contracts. Prior to entering into a 
processing contract, distributing agencies shall test end products. The 
end product testing may be delegated to the purchasing recipient agency 
provided that test results are reviewed by the distributing agency. 
Distributing agencies shall monitor the acceptability of processed end 
products as required in Sec. 250.30(b)(1).

[54 FR 42477, Oct. 17, 1989]


<R04>
           Subpart C--Processing and Labeling of Donated Foods


<R05>
Sec. 250.30  State processing of donated foods.

    (a) General. This section sets forth the terms and conditions under 
which distributing agencies, subdistributing agencies, or recipient 
agencies may enter into contracts for the processing of donated foods 
and prescribes the minimum requirements to be included in such 
contracts.
    (b) Permissible contractual arrangements. (1) A distributing agency, 
subdistributing agency, or recipient agency may contract for processing, 
pay the processing fee, and deliver the end products to eligible 
recipient agencies through its own distribution system. Distributing 
agencies shall assure that the acceptability of processed end products 
is tested with recipient agencies eligible to receive them prior to 
entering into a processing contract and shall develop a system for 
monitoring product acceptability. Distributing agencies may exempt end 
products from testing if they have been used previously, have been 
determined by the distributing agency to be acceptable by recipient 
agencies, and have had no changes in specifications.
    (2) A distributing agency or subdistributing agency may contract for 
processing on behalf of one or more recipient agencies. All recipient 
agencies eligible to receive the donated foods to be processed may 
receive end products made from those foods and produced under such 
processing contracts by virtue of the distributing agency--recipient 
agency agreement required by Sec. 250.12(b). Under this arrangement and 
subject to the approval of the distributing agency:
    (i) Processors shall utilize either a discount or a refund system as 
defined in Sec. 250.3 when they sell end products directly to recipient 
agencies, or
    (ii) When selling end products through a distributor, such sales 
shall be in accordance with paragraph (e) of this section.
    (3) Distributing agencies shall permit subdistributing agencies and 
recipient agencies to enter into processing contracts with a processor 
under arrangements similar to those described in paragraph (b) (1) or 
(2) of this section.
    (c) Requirements for processing contracts. (1) Contracts with 
processors shall be in a standard written form and shall be reviewed by 
the appropriate FCSRO. Processing contracts shall terminate on June 30 
of each year. However, processing contracts may give contracting 
agencies the option of extending contracts for two 1-year periods, 
provided that any changed information must be updated before any 
contract extension is granted, including the information in paragraphs 
(c)(3), (c)(4)(ii), and (c)(4)(viii)(B) of this section. The processor 
must have performed to the satisfaction of the contracting agency during 
the previous contract year, submitted all required reports and any 
corrections to such reports up to the time that contract extension 
occurs, and submitted its certified public accountant report as required 
under paragraph (c)(4)(xi) of this section before the contract may be 
extended. Distributing agencies shall develop criteria for use in 
evaluating and selecting processing contracts. The selection criteria 
shall be used in selecting or rejecting processors in a manner that 
ensures equitable treatment of processors. The selection criteria shall, 
at a minimum, include:
    (i) The nutritional contribution which the end product will provide;

[[Page 401]]

    (ii) The marketability of the end product;
    (iii) The distribution method which the processor intends to 
utilize;
    (iv) Price and yield schedule data;
    (v) Any applicable labeling requirements; and
    (vi) The ability of the processor to meet the terms and conditions 
set forth in the regulations.

These criteria will be reviewed by the appropriate FCSRO during the 
management evaluation review of the distributing agency. Distributing 
agencies and subdistributing agencies which enter into contracts on 
behalf of recipient agencies but which do not limit the types of end 
products which can be sold or the number of processors which can sell 
end products within the State are not required to follow the selection 
criteria. In addition to utilizing these selection criteria, when a 
contracting agency enters into a contract both for the processing of 
donated food and the purchase of the end products produced from the 
donated food, the procurement standards set forth in Attachment O to OMB 
Circular A-102 must be followed. Recipient agencies which purchase end 
products produced under Statewide agreements are also required to comply 
with Attachment O of OMB Circular A-102. Contracting agencies shall not 
enter contracts with processors which cannot demonstrate the ability to 
meet the terms and conditions of the regulations and the distributing 
agency agreements; furnish prior to the delivery of any donated foods 
for processing, a performance bond, an irrevocable letter of credit or 
an escrow account in an amount sufficient to protect the contract value 
of donated food on hand and on order; demonstrate the ability to 
distribute end products to eligible recipient agencies; provide a 
satisfactory record of integrity, business ethics and performance and 
provide adequate storage.
    (2) Standard form contracts shall be prepared or reviewed by the 
appropriate State legal staff to assure conformity with the requirements 
of these regulations and of applicable Federal, State and local laws.
    (3) The contract shall be signed for the processor by the owner, a 
partner, or a corporate officer duly authorized to sign the contract, as 
follows:
    (i) In a sole proprietorship, the owner shall sign the contract;
    (ii) In a partnership, a partner shall sign the contract;
    (iii) In a corporation, a duly authorized corporate officer shall 
sign the contract.
    (4) At a minimum, each processing contract shall include:
    (i) The names and telephone numbers of the contracting agency and 
processor;
    (ii) A description of each end product, the quantity of each donated 
food and the identification of any other ingredient which is needed to 
yield a specific number of units of each end product (except that the 
contracting agency may permit the processor to specify the total 
quantity of any flavorings or seasonings which may be used without 
identifying the ingredients which are, or may be, components of 
flavorings or seasonings), the total weight of all ingredients in the 
batch formula, the yield factor for each donated food, and any pricing 
information provided by the processor in addition to that required in 
paragraph (c)(4)(iii) of this section as requested by the contracting 
agency and a thorough explanation of what this additional pricing 
information represents. The yield factor is the percentage of the 
donated food which must be returned in the end product to be distributed 
to eligible recipient agencies. For substitutable donated foods, at 
least 100 percent of the donated food provided to the processor must be 
physically contained in the end products with no allowable tolerance;
    (iii) The contract value of each donated food to be processed and, 
where processing is to be performed only on a fee-for-service basis as 
defined in Sec. 250.3, the fee-for-service;
    (iv) A provision for:
    (A) Termination of the contract upon thirty days written notice by 
the contracting agency or the processor and
    (B) Immediate termination of the contract when there has been 
noncompliance with its terms and conditions by the contracting agency or 
the processor;

[[Page 402]]

    (v) In the event of contract termination, a provision for 
disposition of donated foods and end products in the processor's 
inventories or payment of funds in accordance with paragraph (j) of this 
section;
    (vi) A provision for inspection and certification during processing, 
where applicable, by the appropriate acceptance service in accordance 
with paragraphs (g) and (h) of this section;
    (vii) A provision that end products containing donated foods that 
are not substitutable under paragraph (f) of this section shall be 
delivered only to eligible recipient agencies and that end products 
containing both substitutable and non-substitutable donated foods may be 
delivered and sold in accordance with the requirements of paragraph (d) 
and (e) of this section;
    (viii) Provisions that the processor shall:
    (A) Fully account for all donated foods delivered into its 
possession by production and delivery to the contracting agency or 
eligible recipient agencies of an appropriate number of units of end 
products meeting the contract specifications, and where end products are 
sold through a distributor, that the processor remains full accountable 
for the donated foods until refunds or any other credits equal to their 
contracted value have been made to eligible recipient agencies in 
accordance with paragraph (k) of this section or to distributing 
agencies in accordance with paragraph (n)(2) of this section;
    (B) Furnish to the contracting agency prior to the delivery of any 
donated foods for processing documentation that a performance supply and 
surety bond from a surety company listed in the most recent U.S. 
Department of Treasury Circular 570, an irrevocable letter of credit or 
an escrow account has been obtained in an amount that is sufficient to 
protect the contract value of all donated foods. Since the distributing 
agency is held liable by FCS for any donated foods provided to a 
processor the distributing agency shall determine the dollar value of 
the performance supply and surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit or 
the escrow account taking into consideration the
    (1) Value of donated foods on hand;
    (2) Value of donated foods on order and
    (3) Anticipated usage rate during the contract period;
    (C) Use or dispose of the containers in which donated foods are 
received from the Department in accordance with the instructions of the 
contracting agency;
    (D) Apply as credit against the processing fee or return to the 
contracting agency and identify:
    (1) Any funds received from the sale of containers, and
    (2) The market value or the price received from the sale of any by-
products of donated foods or commercial foods which have been 
substituted for donated foods;
    (E) Substitute donated foods with commercially purchased foods only 
in accordance with paragraph (f) of this section;
    (F) Meet the requirements of paragraph (i) of this section for 
labeling end products;
    (G) Maintain accurate and complete records pertaining to the 
receipt, disposal, and inventory of donated foods in accordance with 
Sec. 250.16;
    (H) Submit processing performance reports in accordance with 
paragraph (m) of this section; and
    (I) Submit annual reconciliation reports and make payments to 
distributing agencies for any inventory remaining at the termination of 
the contract in accordance with paragraph (n)(3) of this section.
    (ix) A provision that approval of the contract by distributing 
agency shall not obligate that agency or the Department to deliver 
donated foods for processing;
    (x) A description of the processor's quality control system and 
assurance that an effective quality control system will be maintained 
for the duration of the contract;
    (xi) In instances when the processor is a multi-State processor as 
defined in Sec. 250.3, a provision that the processor agrees to obtain 
an independent audit by a certified public accountant in accordance with 
Sec. 250.18(b);
    (xii) A requirement that inventory drawdowns shall be limited to the 
actual amount of donated foods contained in the end product. Additional

[[Page 403]]

commodity required to account for production loss shall be obtained from 
non-donated foods;
    (xiii) A provision that the fee-for-service or value pass-through 
system to be used for the sale of end products to recipient agencies 
shall be described and be consistent with paragraphs (d) and (e) of this 
section.
    (xiv) In instances when the distributing agency has delegated the 
responsibility for sales verification for end products provided by a 
distributor to recipient agencies at a discount, assurance that the 
processor will submit sales verification data to the distributing agency 
in accordance with Sec. 250.30(m)(l); and
    (xv) A provision that the contracting agency shall give the 
processor a list of all recipient agencies eligible to purchase end 
products under the contract and provide updates for any changes which 
occur during the contract period.
    (xvi) A provision that the processor shall not assign the processing 
contract or delegate any aspect of processing under a subcontract or 
other arrangement without the written consent of the contracting agency 
and the distributing agency.
    (xvii) A provision that the processor shall provide pricing 
information summaries and updated pricing information summaries as 
required in paragraphs (d)(3) and (e)(2) of this section.
    (xviii) A provision that the processor shall maintain documentation 
which demonstrates that the level of the processor's commercial 
production has not been reduced, as required in paragraph (f)(1)(iii) of 
this section.
    (d) End products sold by processors. (1) When recipient agencies pay 
the processor for end products, such sales shall be under:
    (i) A refund system as defined in Sec. 250.3 and in accordance with 
paragraph (k) of this section; or
    (ii) A discount system which provides the price of each unit of end 
product purchased by eligible recipient agencies to be discounted by the 
stated contract value of the donated foods contained therein; or
    (iii) An alternative value pass-through system under which the value 
of the donated food contained in each unit of end product shall be 
passed to the recipient agency and which has been approved by FCS at the 
request of the distributing agency. Any alternative value pass-through 
system approved under this paragraph must comply with the sales 
verification requirements specified in Sec. 250.19(b) of this part, or 
an alternative verification system approved by FCS. The Department 
retains the authority to inspect and review all pertinent records 
including records pertaining to the verification of a statistically 
valid sample of sales. FCS may consider the paperwork and resource 
burden associated with alternative value pass-through systems when 
considering approval and reserves the right to deny the approval of 
systems which are labor-intensive and provide no greater accountability 
than those systems permitted under paragraphs (d) and (e) of this 
section.
    (2) When a processor delivers end products produced under a fee-for-
service contract, the processor shall separately identify on the bill 
for the recipient agency the agreed-upon fee-for-service and any 
delivery costs.
    (3) Processors shall provide pricing information summaries to 
contracting agencies and contracting agencies shall provide this 
information to recipient agencies as soon as possible after contract 
approval. If this pricing information changes during the contract 
period, processors shall provide updated pricing information to the 
contracting agency 30 days prior to the effective date of the change, 
which, in turn, shall provide this updated information to eligible 
recipient agencies.
    (e) End products sold by distributors.
    (1) When a processor transfers end products to a distributor for 
delivery and sale to recipient agencies, such sales shall be under:
    (i) A refund system as defined in Sec. 250.3 and in accordance with 
paragraph (k) of this section; or
    (ii) A hybrid system which provides a refund for the contract value 
of the donated food shall be provided to the distributor in accordance 
with paragraph (k) of this section and the price of each

[[Page 404]]

unit of end product purchased by eligible recipient agencies through a 
distributor shall be discounted by the contract value of the donated 
foods contained therein; or
    (iii) An alternative value pass-through system under which the 
contract value of the donated food contained in each unit of end product 
shall be passed on to the recipient agency and which has been approved 
by FCS in accordance with paragraph (d)(1)(iii) of this section; or
    (iv) When a processor arranges for delivery of processed end 
products produced under fee-for-service contracts by distributors, the 
products shall be delivered and invoiced using one of the following 
procedures:
    (A) The recipient agency is billed by the processor for the fee-for-
service and the distributor bills the recipient agency for the storage 
and delivery of the end products; or
    (B) The processor arranges for the delivery of end products through 
a distributor on behalf of the recipient agency. In this system, the 
processor's invoice must include both the fee-for-service and the 
distributor's charges as separate, clearly identifiable charges.
    (2) Processors shall provide pricing information summaries to 
contracting agencies and contracting agencies shall provide this 
information to recipient agencies as soon as possible after contract 
approval. If this pricing information changes during the contract 
period, the processor shall provide updated pricing information to the 
contracting agency, which, in turn, shall provide this information to 
the eligible recipient agencies.
    (f) Substitution of donated foods with commercial foods. (1) The 
processing contract may provide for substitution of donated foods as 
defined in Sec. 250.3. If the provision allowing substitution is 
included, the contract shall stipulate that:
    (i) Only butter, cheese, corn grits, cornmeal, flour, macaroni, 
nonfat dry milk, peanut butter, peanut granules, roasted peanuts, rice, 
rolled oats, rolled wheat, shortening, vegetable oil, and spaghetti may 
be substitutable as defined in Sec. 250.3 and such other food as FCS 
specifically approves as substitutable under paragraph (f)(4) of this 
section (substitution of meat and poultry items shall not be permitted),
    (ii) All components of commercial foods substituted for those 
donated must be of U.S. origin and be identical or superior in every 
particular of the donated-food specification as evidenced by 
certification performed by, or acceptable to, the applicable Federal 
acceptance service, and
    (iii) Processors shall maintain documentation that they have not 
reduced their level of commercial production because of participation in 
the State processing program.
    (2) Documentation must be maintained by both parties in accordance 
with Sec. 250.16. Where commercial food is authorized to be substituted 
for any donated food specifically listed in paragraph (f)(1)(i) of this 
section, the processor shall maintain records to substantiate that it 
continues to acquire on the commercial market sufficient purchases of 
substitutable food for commercial production and any amounts necessary 
to meet the 100 percent yield requirement. When there is substitution, 
the donated foods shall be used by the processor and shall not otherwise 
be sold or disposed of in bulk form. The applicable Federal acceptance 
service shall, upon request by the Department, the contracting agency or 
the distributing agency determine if the quality analysis meets the 
requirements set forth by the Agricultural Stabilization and 
Conservation Service (ASCS) in the original inspection of donated foods 
and, in the case of concentrated skim milk replacing donated nonfat dry 
milk, determine if the concentrated skim milk contains the amount of 
milk solids as specified in the contract. When donated foods are 
nonsubstitutable, the applicable Federal acceptance service shall ensure 
against unauthorized substitutions, and verify that quantities of 
donated foods used are as specified in the contract.
    (3) When concentrated skim milk is used to replace donated nonfat 
dry milk, the contract shall also specify (in addition to the 
requirements in paragraph (c) of this section):
    (i) The percent of milk solids that, at a minimum, must be contained 
in the concentrated skim milk;

[[Page 405]]

    (ii) The weight ratio of concentrated skim milk to donated nonfat 
dry milk;
    (A) The weight ratio is the weight of concentrated skim milk which 
equals one pound of donated nonfat dry milk, based on milk solids;
    (B) In calculating this weight, nonfat dry milk shall be considered 
as containing 96.5 percent milk solids;
    (C) If more than one concentration of concentrated skim milk is to 
be used, a separate weight ratio must be specified for each 
concentration;
    (iii) The processor's method of verifying that the milk solids 
content of the concentrated skim milk is as stated in the contract;
    (iv) A requirement that inventory drawdowns of donated nonfat dry 
milk shall be limited to an amount equal to the amount of concentrated 
skim milk, based on the weight ratio, used to produce the end product;
    (v) A requirement that the contract value of donated food for a 
given amount of concentrated skim milk used to produce an end product is 
the value of the equivalent amount of nonfat dry milk, based on the 
weight ratio of the two foods;
    (vi) A requirement that the concentrated skim milk shall be produced 
in a USDA approved plant or in a plant approved by the appropriate 
regulatory authority for the processing of Grade A milk products; and
    (vii) A requirement that documentation sufficient to substantiate 
compliance with the contract provisions shall be maintained in 
accordance with Sec. 250.16(a)(4).
    (4) Processor may request approval to substitute commercial foods 
for donated foods not specifically listed in paragraph (f)(1)(i) of this 
section by submitting such request to FCS in writing and satisfying all 
requirements of paragraphs (f)(1)(ii) and (iii) of this section. FCS 
will notify the processor in writing of authorization to substitute 
commercial foods for donated foods not listed in paragraph (f)(1)(i) of 
this section and such authorization shall apply for the duration of all 
current contracts entered into by the processor pursuant to this 
section.
    (5) Title to the substituted food shall transfer to the contracting 
agency upon the initiation of the processing of the end product 
containing the substituted food. Title to the equivalent amount of 
donated food shall transfer to the processor at the same time (except 
when the substitution is necessary to meet the 100 percent yield 
requirement or to otherwise replace missing or out-of-condition donated 
food). Once title has transferred, the processor shall use the 
substituted food in accordance with the terms and conditions of this 
part.
    (g) Meat and poultry inspection programs. When donated meat or 
poultry products are processed or when any commercial meat or poultry 
products are incorporated into an end product containing one or more 
donated foods, all of the processing shall be performed in plants under 
continuous Federal meat or poultry inspection, or continuous State meat 
or poultry inspection in States certified to have programs at least 
equal to the Federal inspection programs. In addition to FSIS 
inspection, all donated meat and poultry processing shall be performed 
under AMS acceptance service grading. The cost of this service shall be 
borne by the processor. In the event the processor can demonstrate that 
grading is impractical, exemptions in the use of acceptance services 
shall be approved by the distributing agency prior to processing each 
order. Exemptions in the use of acceptance service graders will be 
authorized on the basis of each order to be processed provided the 
processor can demonstrate:
    (1) That even with ample notification time, the processor cannot 
secure the services of a grader,
    (2) That the cost for a grader would be unduly excessive relative to 
the value of foods being processed and that production runs cannot be 
combined or scheduled to enable prorating of the costs of services among 
the purchasers of end products, or
    (3) The documented urgency of the recipient agency's need for the 
end product precludes the use of acceptance services.

Prior to approving a processor's request to waive the acceptance service 
requirement the distributing agency shall ensure, based on the 
processor's past performance, that the quality of the end product 
produced will in no

[[Page 406]]

way be adversely affected as a result of waiving the requirement.
    (h) Certification by acceptance service. (1) All processing 
activities of donated foods shall be subject to review and audit by the 
Department, including the applicable Federal acceptance service. The 
contracting agency may also require acceptance and certification by such 
acceptance service in addition to the requirements set forth in 
paragraph (g) of this section.
    (2) In the case of substitutable donated foods, in deciding whether 
to require acceptance and certification, the contracting agency should 
consider the dollar value of the donated foods delivered to the 
processor.
    (3) When contracting agencies require certification in accordance 
with paragraph (h) (1) or (2) of this section, the degree of acceptance 
and certification necessary under the processing contract shall be 
determined by the appropriate Federal acceptance service after 
consultation with the distributing agency concerning the type and volume 
of the donated foods and anticipated value of end products to be 
processed. The cost of this service shall also be borne by the 
processor.
    (i) Labeling end products. (1) Except when end products contain 
donated foods that are substituted under paragraph (f) of this section, 
the exterior shipping containers of end products and, where practicable, 
the individual wrappings or containers of end products, shall be clearly 
labeled ``Contains Commodities Donated by the United States Department 
of Agriculture. This Product Shall Be Sold Only to Eligible Recipient 
Agencies.''
    (2) Labels on all end products shall meet applicable Federal 
labeling requirements.
    (3) When a processor makes any claim with regard to an end product's 
contribution toward meal requirements of any child nutrition program, 
the processor shall follow procedures established by FCS, the Food 
Safety and Inspection Service of the Department, the National Marine 
Fisheries Service of the U.S. Department of Commerce or other applicable 
Federal agencies for approval of such labels.
    (j) Termination of processing contracts. (1) When contracts are 
terminated or completed and the processor has commodities remaining in 
inventory, the processor shall be directed, at the option of the 
distributing agency and the FCSRO, to do the following:
    (i) With respect to nonsubstitutable commodities, the processor 
shall:
    (A) Return the commodities to the contracting agency;
    (B) Pay the contracting agency for the commodities based on the 
Department's replacement costs, determined by using the most recent data 
provided by the Department; or
    (C) Pay the contracting agency for the commodities based on the 
contract value stated in the processor's contract;
    (D) Pay the contracting agency the CCC unrestricted sales price;
    (ii) With respect to substitutable commodities, the processor shall:
    (A) With the concurrence of any affected contracting agencies, 
transfer the donated foods to the accounts of other contracting agencies 
with which the processor has contracts;
    (B) Return the foods donated to the contracting agency;
    (C) Replace the commodities with the same foods of equal or better 
quality as certified in accordance with paragraph (f)(2) of this section 
and deliver such foods to the contracting agency;
    (D) Pay the contracting agency for the commodities based on the 
Department's replacement costs, determined by using the most recent data 
provided by the Department; or
    (E) Pay the contracting agency for the commodities based on the 
contract value stated in the processor's contract.
    (F) Pay the contracting agency the CCC unrestricted sales price.
    (2) When a processor's contract is terminated at the processor's 
request or due to noncompliance or negligence on the part of the 
processor and commodities remaining in the processor's inventory are 
transported pursuant to paragraph (j)(1)(i)(A), (j)(1)(ii)(B) or 
(j)(1)(ii)(C) of this section, the processor shall pay the 
transportation costs.
    (3) Funds received by distributing agencies upon termination of 
contracts shall be used in accordance with FCS

[[Page 407]]

Instruction 410-1, Non-Audit Claims, Food Distribution Program.
    (k) Refund payments. (1) When end products are sold to recipient 
agencies in accordance with the refund provisions of paragraph (d) or 
(e) of this section, each recipient agency shall submit refund 
applications to the processor within 30 days from the close of the month 
in which the sales were made, except that recipient agencies may submit 
refund applications to a single processor on a Federal fiscal quarterly 
basis if the total anticipated refund due for all purchases of product 
from that processor during the quarter is 25 dollars or less.
    (2) In instances when refunds are to be provided to distributors 
which have sold end products to recipient agencies at a discount, 
distributors shall submit refund applications to processors within 30 
days from the close of the month in which the sales were made of the 
date of sale to recipient agencies in order to receive benefits.
    (3) Not later than 30 days after receipt of the application by the 
processor, the processor shall make a payment to the recipient agency or 
distributor equal to the stated contract value of the donated foods 
contained in the purchased end products covered by the refund 
application, except that processors may group together refund 
applications for a single recipient agency on a Federal fiscal quarterly 
basis if the total anticipated refund due that recipient agency during 
the quarter is 25 dollars or less. Copies of requests for refunds and 
payments to recipient agencies and/or distributors shall be forwarded to 
the appropriate distributing agency by the processor.
    (l) Contract approvals. Distributing agencies shall review and 
approve processing contracts entered into or renewed by subdistributing 
and recipient agencies prior to the delivery of commodities for 
processing under such contracts. The distributing agency which enters 
into or approves a processing contract shall provide a copy of the 
contract and of these regulations to the processors, forward a copy of 
the contract to the appropriate FCSRO, and retain a copy for its files.
    (m) Performance reports. (1) Processors shall be required to submit 
to distributing agencies monthly reports of performance under each 
processing contract with year-to-date totals. Processors contracting 
with agencies other than a distributing agency shall submit such reports 
to the distributing agency having authority over that particular 
contracting agency. Performance reports shall be postmarked no later 
than the final day of the month following the reporting period; however, 
the final performance report for the contract period shall be postmarked 
no later than 60 postmarked days from the close of the contract year. 
The report shall include:
    (i) A list of all recipient agencies purchasing end products under 
the contract;
    (ii) Donated-food inventory at the beginning of the reporting 
period;
    (iii) Amount of donated foods received during the reporting period;
    (iv) Amount of donated foods transferred to and/or from existing 
inventory;
    (v) Number of units approved end products delivered to each eligible 
recipient agency during the reporting period and the number of pounds of 
each donated food represented by these delivered end products;
    (vi) Donated food inventory at the end of the reporting period;
    (vii) [Reserved].
    (viii) In instances in which sales verification has been delegated 
to the processor pursuant to Sec. 250.19(b)(2), sales verification 
findings shall be reported as an attachment to the December and June 
performance reports in whatever format the State distributing agency 
deems necessary.
    (ix) A certification statement that sufficient donated foods are in 
inventory or on order to account for the quantities needed for 
production of end products for State processing contracts and that the 
processor has on hand or on order adequate quantities of foods purchased 
commercially to meet the processor's production requirements for 
commercial sales.
    (2) In addition to reporting the information identified in paragraph 
(m)(1) of this section, processors which substitute concentrated skim 
milk for donated nonfat dry milk shall also report

[[Page 408]]

the following information for the reporting period:
    (i) The number of pounds of nonfat dry milk used in commercial 
products sold to outlets which are not recipient agencies; and
    (ii) The number of pounds of concentrated skim milk, and the percent 
of milk solids contained therein, used in end products sold to recipient 
agencies.
    (3) Distributing agencies shall review and analyze reports submitted 
by processors to ensure that performance under each contract is in 
accordance with the provisions set forth in this section.
    (n) Inventory controls. (1) Distributing agencies shall monitor 
processor inventories to ensure that the quantity of donated foods for 
which a processor is accountable is the lowest cost-efficient level but 
in no event more than a six-month supply based on the processor's 
average monthly usage, unless a higher level has been specifically 
approved by the distributing agency on the basis of a written 
justification submitted by the processor. Under no circumstances should 
the amount of donated foods ordered by the contracting agency for 
processing purposes be in excess of anticipated usage or beyond the 
processor's ability to accept and store the donated foods at any one 
time. Distributing agencies shall make no further distribution to 
processors whose inventories exceed these limits until such inventories 
have been reduced.
    (2) For processors substituting concentrated skim milk for donated 
nonfat dry milk, distributing agencies shall review the processors' 
monthly performance reports to ensure that:
    (i) Donated nonfat dry milk inventory is being drawn down based on 
the amount of milk solids contained in the concentrated skim milk which 
was used in end products sold to eligible recipient agencies;
    (ii) An amount of milk solids equivalent to the amount in the 
donated nonfat dry milk is contained in end products sold to eligible 
recipient agencies; and
    (iii) Donated nonfat dry milk is not being sold in bulk form.
    (3) The last monthly performance report for the contract period, as 
required in paragraph (m)(1) of this section, shall serve as the annual 
reconciliation report. As a part of the annual reconciliation, a 
processor which has entered into a contract with the contracting agency 
for the next year shall pay the distributing agency, at the contract 
value, for any donated food inventory held which is in excess of the 
inventory level which has been approved by the State distributing 
agency. A processor whose contract has been completed or terminated 
shall return or pay for commodities as required by subsection (j).
    (4) Distributing agencies shall certify the accuracy of the annual 
reconciliation report and forward it to the FCS Regional Office. Such 
report shall be postmarked no later than 90 days following the close of 
the contract year. All monies shall be used in accordance with FCS 
Instruction 410-1, Non-Audit Claims, Food Distribution Program.
    (5) Distributing agencies shall not submit food requisitions for 
processors reporting no sales activity during the prior year's contract 
period unless documentation is submitted by the processor which outlines 
specific plans for product promotion or sales expansion.
    (o) Processing inventory reports. (1) Distributing agencies shall 
forward to the FCS Regional Office the inventory summary portion of the 
monthly performance report submitted by the processors in accordance 
with paragraph (m)(1) of this section for the last month of each Federal 
fiscal quarter. Such reports shall be postmarked no later than 60 days 
following the close of each Federal fiscal quarter, except that such 
reports shall be postmarked no later than 90 days following the close of 
the contract year.
    (2) In addition to the reporting requirements in paragraph (o)(1) of 
this section, for each processor which substitutes concentrated skim 
milk for donated nonfat dry milk the distributing agency shall also 
report the following information for the reporting period:
    (i) The number of pounds of nonfat dry milk used in commercial 
products sold to nonprogram outlets; and
    (ii) The number of pounds of concentrated skim milk and the percent 
of

[[Page 409]]

milk solids contained therein used in end products sold to recipient 
agencies.
    (p) Cooperation with administering agencies for child nutrition 
programs. If the distributing agency which enters into or approves 
contracts for end products to be used in a child nutrition program does 
not also administer such program, it shall collaborate with the 
administering agency by;
    (1) Giving that agency an opportunity to review all such contracts 
to determine whether end products to be provided contribute to required 
nutritional standards for reimbursement under the applicable regulations 
for such program (7 CFR parts 210, 225, and 226) or are otherwise 
suitable for use in such program;
    (2) Consulting with the agency with regard to the labeling 
requirements for the end products; and
    (3) Otherwise requesting technical assistance as needed from that 
agency.
    (q) FCSRO review of contracts and inventory reports. The FCSRO 
shall:
    (1) Review all processing contracts and provide guidance, including 
written recommendations for termination, where necessary, to 
distributing agencies concerning any contracts which do not meet the 
requirements of this section;
    (2) Allow distributing agencies 30 days to respond to any 
recommendation concerning contracts not meeting the requirements of this 
section;
    (3) Review and analyze the processing inventory reports required by 
paragraph (o) of this section to ensure that no additional donated foods 
shall be distributed to processors with excess inventories until such 
inventories have been reduced;
    (4) Assist distributing agencies in reducing such inventories; and
    (5) Review annual reconciliation reports required by paragraph (n) 
of this section and ensure that payments for commodities have been made.
    (r) Availability of copies of processing contracts. Contracts 
entered into in accordance with this Section are public records and FCS 
will provide copies of such contracts to any person upon request. The 
FCSRO will retain copies of processing contracts submitted by 
distributing agencies for a period of three years from the close of the 
Federal fiscal year to which they pertain.
    (s) Processing activity guidance. Distributing agencies shall 
develop and provide a processing manual or similar procedural material 
for guidance to contracting agencies, recipient agencies, and 
processors. Distributing agencies must revise these materials as 
necessary to reflect policy and regulatory changes. This guidance 
material shall be provided to contracting agencies, recipient agencies 
and processors at the time of the approval of the initial agreement by 
the distributing agency, when there have been regulatory or policy 
changes which necessitate changes in the guidance materials, and upon 
request. The manual shall include, at a minimum, statements of the 
distributing agency's policies and procedures on (1) contract approval, 
(2) monitoring and review of processing activities, (3) recordkeeping 
and reporting requirements, (4) inventory controls, and (5) refund 
applications.
    (t) Waiver authority. The Food and Consumer Service may waive any of 
the requirements contained in this part for the purpose of conducting 
demonstration projects to test program changes designed to improve the 
State processing of donated foods.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
0584-0007)

[53 FR 20226, June 3, 1988, as amended at 53 FR 20598, June 6, 1988; 53 
FR 27476, July 21, 1988; 53 FR 46080, Nov. 16, 1988; 54 FR 7525, Feb. 
22, 1989; 54 FR 25564, June 16, 1989; 58 FR 39122, July 22, 1993; 59 FR 
62984, Dec. 7, 1994; 61 FR 5272, Feb. 12, 1996]


<R04>
           Subpart D--Eligible Recipient Agencies and Programs


<R05>
Sec. 250.40  Nonprofit summer camps for children.

    (a) Distribution. (1) The distributing agency shall distribute 
donated food only to those summer camps which have entered into a 
written agreement for participation in the program with the distributing 
agency in accordance with Sec. 250.12(b). Prior to entering into a 
written agreement, the summer camp shall provide verification of its tax 
exempt status under the Internal Revenue Code. In addition to the terms 
and conditions set forth in Sec. 250.12(b), the

[[Page 410]]

written agreement shall, at a minimum, include:
    (i) The name and location of the summer camp(s);
    (ii) Number of camps or sites;
    (iii) Number of sessions to be offered during camping season;
    (iv) Number of adults and children participating in the activities 
of the summer camp at each session;
    (v) Total number of days meals will be served;
    (vi) Total number of meals to be served daily;
    (vii) Assurance that tax exempt status will be maintained;
    (viii) Indication of whether the summer camp(s) will employ the 
services of a food service management company;
    (ix) Assurance that a brochure or public announcement of open 
admission policy will be provided and that the summer camp agrees to 
maintain racial/ethnic data;
    (x) Assurance that a physical inventory will be conducted and 
reconciled at the end of the camping session; and
    (xi) Assurance that any excess inventory will, at the distributing 
agency's option, be returned to the distributing agency for redonation 
or transferred in accordance with Sec. 250.13(a)(1).
    (2) Distributing agencies shall distribute donated foods only after 
determining that the number of adults participating in camp activities, 
as compared with the number of children 18 years of age and under, is 
not unreasonable in light of the nature of the camp and the 
characteristics of the children in attendance. Persons 19 years of age 
and over, including program directors, counselors and others who engage 
in recreational, educational, and direct administrative functions, are 
to be considered as adults participating in the activities of a summer 
camp. Employees whose presence on camp premises is solely for the 
purpose of performing duties such as cooking, gardening, property 
maintenance or similar support functions are not considered as adults 
participating in summer camp activities. In addition, persons such as 
nurses, therapists, and attendants who perform professional, 
supervisory, or custodial services are not considered as adults 
participating in the activities of a summer camp if they perform 
services essential to the participation of mentally, emotionally, or 
physically handicapped children.
    (3) Distributing agencies shall authorize the transfer or redonation 
of all donated foods remaining in summer camps at the end of the camping 
season in accordance with Sec. 250.13 (a) or (g) respectively.
    (4) Nonprofit summer camps for children may employ food service 
management companies to conduct food service operations in accordance 
with Sec. 250.12(c).
    (b) Quantities and value of donated foods. Distribution of donated 
food to eligible summer camps shall be made on the basis of the average 
number of meals to be served daily to children as evidence by the most 
recent written caseload factor information contained in the agreement.
    (c) Types of donated foods authorized for donation. Nonprofit summer 
camps for children are eligible to receive donated foods under section 
416, section 32, section 709 and section 4(a).


<R05>
Sec. 250.41  Charitable institutions.

    (a) Distribution. (1) With the exception of section 110 commodities, 
which are to be distributed in accordance with the provisions of 
Sec. 250.52, the distributing agency shall distribute donated food only 
to those charitable institutions which have entered into a written 
agreement for participation in the program with the distributing agency 
in accordance with Sec. 250.12(b). Prior to entering into a written 
agreement, the charitable institution shall provide verification of the 
institution's tax exempt status under the Internal Revenue Code. In 
addition to the terms and conditions set forth in Sec. 250.12(b), 
written agreements shall, at a minimum, include:
    (i) The name and location of the charitable institution;
    (ii) Total number of days meals will be served;
    (iii) Average daily number of participants;
    (iv) Total number of meals by type to be served daily to needy 
persons;
    (v) Data that show the number of needy persons receiving benefits 
under

[[Page 411]]

another means-tested program or financial data that show the total 
annual amount of funds received by the institution that are derived, 
respectively, from (A) subsidized income and (B) nonsubsidized income. 
For the purpose of this section ``subsidized income'' shall mean income 
from public tax funds which are provided on behalf of participants that 
have been determined to be in need of financial assistance through a 
means-tested program such as Medicaid or income received through private 
federally tax exempt contributions which are provided for the care of 
participants which the institution had determined to be in need of 
financial assistance. ``Nonsubsidized income'' shall mean all other 
income, including payments made on behalf of participants by persons 
legally responsible for their support;
    (vi) Indication of whether the charitable institution will employ 
the services of a food service management company to conduct its food 
service operations;
    (vii) Assurance that proper inventory controls will be maintained; 
and
    (viii) Assurance that all reports will be submitted as required by 
the distributing agency.
    (2) Adult correctional institutions are eligible to receive donated 
foods as charitable institutions, to the extent that needy persons are 
served, if they conduct rehabilitation programs that are:
     (i) Available to either a majority of the total inmate population 
(including inmates awaiting trial or sentencing) or to a majority of 
sentenced inmates; and
    (ii) Of sufficient scope to permit participation for a minimum of 10 
hours per week per inmate by either a majority of the total inmate 
population or a majority of sentenced inmates.

Prior to entering into an agreement for donation of foods to an adult 
correctional institution, the distributing agency shall require the 
institution's director or other responsible official to provide a 
written statement certifying that the institution conducts such 
rehabilitation programs. The statement shall be reviewed annually and 
maintained as part of the agreement.
    (3) Charitable institutions may employ food service management 
companies to conduct food service operations in accordance with 
Sec. 250.12(c).
    (b) Quantities of donated foods. Distribution of donated foods to 
eligible charitable institutions shall be made on the basis of the 
average number of meals served daily to needy persons. To determine the 
number of needy persons being served, the distributing agency shall 
determine the proportion of subsidized income by dividing the subsidized 
income by the total subsidized and nonsubsidized income (as defined in 
paragraph (a)(1) of this section) and multiplying that number by the 
average daily number of participants as required in 
Sec. 250.41(a)(1)(v), or by simply counting the number of participants 
that receive benefits under another a means-tested program. The 
distributing agency shall use the income and average daily participation 
figures reflected in the agreement in determining the number of needy 
persons being served by the institution in accordance with the above 
formula. Income and participation figures shall be based on the 
institution's records for the previous year. The distributing agency 
shall obtain updated pertinent information by September 30 of each 
fiscal year.
    (c) Types of donated foods authorized for donation. Charitable 
institutions are eligible to receive donated foods under section 416, 
section 32, section 4(a), and section 709.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
0584-0305)

[53 FR 20426, June 3, 1988, as amended at 59 FR 16972, Apr. 11, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 250.42  Nutrition programs for the elderly.

    (a) Distribution. Distributing agencies shall distribute donated 
foods only to nutrition programs for the elderly which have entered into 
an agreement for donation of commodities in accordance with 
Sec. 250.12(b). Food service management companies may be employed to 
conduct food service operations in accordance with Sec. 250.12(c).
    (b) Quantities and value of donated foods. (1) Quantities. 
Distribution of donated foods to nutrition programs for the elderly 
shall be based on the level

[[Page 412]]

of assistance per meal as required by the Older Americans Act of 1965, 
as amended, and on the number of eligible meals served within the State 
as evidenced by written caseload factor information provided by the 
State Agency on Aging.
    (2) Value. (i) For the fiscal years 1986 through 1991, the quantity 
of donated foods to be made available to each State Agency on Aging for 
distribution to nutrition programs for the elderly shall be valued at 
not less than 56.76 cents for each meal which such State Agency on 
Aging, in accordance with regulations and guidelines authorized by the 
Commissioner on Aging, United States Department of Health and Human 
Services, reports as having been served or, where necessary, estimates 
will be served within the State or to Indian Tribal Organizations during 
the year: Provided, however, That:
    (A) This quantity will be reduced to the extent that a State Agency 
on Aging elects to receive cash in lieu of donated foods in accordance 
with paragraph (c) of this section and
    (B) The quantity of donated foods to be provided to any State Agency 
on Aging for any fiscal year shall not be adjusted on the basis of meal 
reports or estimates submitted after July 1 of such fiscal year.
    (ii) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this 
section, in any fiscal year in which compliance with paragraph (b)(2)(i) 
of this section costs more than the amounts authorized to be 
appropriated under the Older Americans Act of 1965, as amended for that 
fiscal year, the Secretary shall reduce the cents per meal level 
determined pursuant to paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section for that 
fiscal year as necessary to meet the authorization of appropriations for 
that fiscal year. If such action is necessary, the per meal level will 
be reduced uniformly for each meal served during that fiscal year.
    (c) Cash in lieu of donated foods. (1) Any State Agency on Aging 
may, for the purposes of the programs authorized by titles III and VI of 
the Older Americans Act of 1965, as amended, elect to receive cash 
payments in lieu of all or any portion of the donated foods that it 
would otherwise receive under paragraph (b) of this section during any 
fiscal year.
    (2) When a State Agency on Aging elects to receive cash payments in 
lieu of donated foods, that election shall be binding on the State 
Agency on Aging for the entire fiscal year to which it pertains, and FCS 
shall make cash payments to the State Agency on Aging equivalent in 
value to the donated foods that would otherwise have been provided. Cash 
payments shall be made for each fiscal quarter by means of Letters of 
Credit issued by FCS through the appropriate U.S. Treasury Regional 
Disbursing Office or, where applicable, by means of U.S. Treasury 
checks, based on the best data available to FCS as to the number of 
meals to be served by nutrition programs for the elderly administered by 
each State Agency on Aging during that fiscal quarter.
    (3) In instances when it is necessary to reduce the annual level of 
assistance specified in paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section, the level 
will be reduced in accordance with paragraph (b)(2)(ii) of this section. 
Once it has been established that the reduced per meal level will be 
sufficient to avoid any further adjustment, any remaining funds (up to 
the level of assistance specified in paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this 
section) will be disbursed so that each State will receive an equal 
amount on a per meal basis.
    (4) To be eligible for reimbursement by FCS, claims for cash payment 
for meals served by nutrition programs for the elderly shall be 
submitted by State Agencies on Aging and Indian Tribal Organizations no 
later than 90 days following the close of the Federal fiscal quarter for 
which payment is claimed.
    (5) The State Agency on Aging desiring to receive funds under this 
paragraph shall enter into a written agreement with FCS pursuant to 
Sec. 250.12(a) to:
    (i) Promptly and equitably disburse any cash it receives in lieu of 
donated foods to nutrition programs for the elderly after consideration 
of the needs of such programs and the availability of other resources, 
including any donated foods available under paragraph (b) of this 
section;
    (ii) Establish such procedures as may be necessary to ensure that 
the cash

[[Page 413]]

disbursements are used by nutrition programs for the elderly solely for 
the purpose of purchasing U.S. agricultural commodities and other foods 
of U.S. origin for their food service operations;
    (iii) Maintain and retain for 3 years from the close of the Federal 
fiscal year to which they pertain complete and accurate records of:
    (A) All amounts received and disbursed under paragraph (c) of this 
section and
    (B) The manner in which consideration was given to the needs and 
resources as required by paragraph (c)(5)(i) of this section; and
    (iv) Permit representatives of the Department and of the General 
Accounting Office of the United States to inspect, audit, and copy such 
records at any reasonable time.
    (6) Funds provided under paragraph (c) of this section shall be 
subject to the Department's Uniform Federal Assistance Regulations (7 
CFR part 3015).
    (d) Types of donated foods authorized for donation. Nutrition 
programs for the elderly are eligible to receive donated foods under 
section 416, section 32, section 311, section 709, and section 14.


<R05>
Sec. 250.43  Disaster organizations.

    (a) Eligibility. In instances in which the President has declared a 
major disaster or emergency pursuant to section 301 of the Disaster 
Relief Act of 1974, as amended (42 U.S.C. 5141) and the Secretary has 
determined that as a result of the major disaster or emergency low-
income households are unable to purchase adequate amounts of nutritious 
food, disaster organizations may be eligible to receive donated foods 
for congregate meal service or household distribution to disaster 
victims. Disaster organizations shall remain eligible for disaster 
assistance for as long as the Secretary determines necessary, taking 
into consideration the consequences of the major disaster or emergency 
on the earning power of the disaster victims; Except, that in areas 
where the Food Stamp Program is in operation, donated foods may be 
distributed for household use only so long as the Secretary finds that 
the commercial channels of trade have been disrupted because of a major 
disaster or emergency. Prior to providing donated foods to disaster 
organizations, the distributing agency shall require the disaster 
organization to make application for the receipt and distribution of 
donated foods in accordance with paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section. 
Such applications shall be confirmed in writing and maintained in 
accordance with the recordkeeping requirements of this part.
    (b) Distribution of donated foods for use in providing congregate 
meal service. (1) In order to obtain donated foods for use in providing 
congregate meal service, disaster organizations shall request approval 
from the appropriate distributing agency, giving the following 
information to the extent possible:
    (i) Description of major disaster or emergency situation;
    (ii) Number of people requiring meals and congregate meal service 
period;
    (iii) Quantity and types of food needed for congregate meal service; 
and
    (iv) Number and location of sites providing congregate meal service.
    (2) Following its approval of the request for donated foods, the 
distributing agency is authorized and shall make appropriate donated 
foods available from any sources within the State to the disaster 
organization and within 24 hours shall report to the appropriate FCSRO 
the information listed in paragraph (b)(1) of this section.
    (c) Household distribution. In order to obtain donated foods for 
household distribution in areas served by the Food Stamp Program when 
commercial food distribution channels are disrupted, the distributing 
agency shall request prior approval by the appropriate FCSRO. In the 
request, the distributing agency shall cite the following information:
    (i) Description of major disaster or emergency situation;
    (ii) Number of households affected;
    (iii) Anticipated distribution period;
    (iv) Method of distribution available; and
    (v) Quantity and types of food needed for distribution.
    (d) Quantities and value of donated foods. The distributing agency 
shall make donated foods available to eligible disaster organizations 
based on the

[[Page 414]]

caseload factor information provided by the disaster organization.
    (e) Types of donated foods authorized for donation. Disaster 
organizations providing major disaster or other emergency food 
assistance under this part are eligible to receive donated foods under 
section 416, section 32, section 709, section 4(a) and sections 409 and 
410 of the Disaster Relief Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5181-82), as amended.
    (f) Summary report. Within 30 days following termination of the 
disaster assistance, the distributing agency shall provide a summary 
report to the appropriate FCSRO using Form FCS-292, Report of Coupon 
Issuance and Commodity Distribution for Disaster Relief.
    (g) Replacement. To the extent donated foods are available, FCS will 
replace donated foods used from the States' stocks for major disaster 
and emergency assistance. The distributing agency shall request the 
replacement of foods used for major disaster and other emergency food 
assistance, in writing to FCSRO, no later than 30 days following 
termination of the disaster assistance.


<R05>
Sec. 250.44  Special group food assistance programs.

    In situations of distress in which needs for food assistance cannot 
be met under other provisions of this part, a distributing agency may, 
upon request to and approval by the Secretary, distribute donated foods 
to any institution, or to any association of persons engaged in 
charitable activities, for use in conducting special group-feeding 
programs on a temporary basis for persons in need of such food 
assistance. Such distributions shall not exceed 30 days. The 
distributing agency, and any such institution or association, shall 
conduct any distribution under this Section in accordance with such 
instructions as the Secretary may specify, and any such institution or 
association shall give to the distributing agency an assurance that 
feeding programs will be conducted in accordance with the instructions.


<R05>
Sec. 250.45  Commodity Supplemental Food Program.

    (a) Distribution. The distributing agency shall distribute donated 
foods to the State agency which is designated by the State to administer 
the Commodity Supplemental Food Program for that State and which has 
entered into a written agreement with the Department for the 
administration of that program in accordance with 7 CFR part 247, the 
regulations for that program. The State agency administering the 
Commodity Supplemental Food Program shall distribute donated foods to 
local agencies for use by eligible recipients in accordance with the 
provisions of 7 CFR part 247 and with the provisions of this part, and 
may enter into an agreement with the distributing agency for use of the 
distributing agency's facilities for distribution.
    (b) Quantities of donated foods. Distribution of donated foods to 
the designated State agencies for the Commodity Supplemental Food 
Program shall be made on the basis of each State agency's quarterly 
estimate of need.
    (c) Types of donated foods authorized for donation. State agencies 
distributing donated foods through the Commodity Supplemental Food 
Program are eligible to receive such foods under section 32, section 
416, section 709 and section 4(a).


<R05>
Sec. 250.46  Food Distribution Program in the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands.

    (a) Distribution. The distributing agency shall make donated foods 
available for distribution to households in the Trust Territory of the 
Pacific Islands by those welfare agencies which certify households in 
accordance with a plan of operation approved by FCS, as required by 
paragraph (d) of this section. Distribution of donated foods to 
households shall be made in accordance with the approved plan of 
operation.
    (b) Quantities and value of donated foods. Distribution of donated 
foods shall be based on the actual number of households in need of food 
assistance.
    (c) Types of donated foods authorized for donation. Agencies which 
make distribution to needy persons are eligible to receive foods under 
section 416, section 32, section 709 and section 4(a).
    (d) Plan of operation. Prior to making distribution to agencies or 
households, the distributing agency shall submit a

[[Page 415]]

plan of operation for approval by the appropriate FCSRO. Such plans 
shall incorporate the procedures and methods to be used in certifying 
households in need of food assistance, in making distribution to 
households, and in providing a fair hearing to households whose claims 
for food assistance under the plan are denied or are not acted upon with 
reasonable promptness, or who are aggrieved by an agency's 
interpretation of any provision of the plan. No amendment to the plan of 
operation of the distributing agency shall be made without prior 
approval of FCS, and FCS may require amendment of any plan as a 
condition of continuing approval. The distributing agency shall require 
welfare agencies making distribution to households to conduct 
distribution programs in accordance with all provisions of the plan of 
operation. At a minimum, the plan shall include the following:
    (1) The name of the public welfare agency or agencies which will be 
responsible for certification of households;
    (2) The manner in which donated food will be distributed, including, 
but not limited to, the identity of the agency that will distribute 
donated foods, the storage and distribution facilities to be used and 
the method of financing;
    (3) The specific criteria to be used in certifying households as in 
need of food assistance. The income and resource standards establishes 
by the distributing agency for use by welfare agencies in determining 
the eligibility of applicant households, after October 1979, shall 
continue to be those standards used as of that date which were 
incorporated in a plan of operation approved by FCS, unless an amendment 
to such standard is required or approved by FCS;
    (4) The method or methods that will be used to verify the 
information upon which the certification of eligibility is based, 
including the kinds of documentary evidence that applicants are required 
to furnish to obtain certification;
    (5) Provisions for periodically reviewing the certifications of 
households to discover any change in their status which would 
necessitate a change in the determination of eligibility. The 
eligibility of households shall be reviewed at least every three months, 
except that such reviews may be made at longer periods, not to exceed 12 
months, provided that such longer periods are based upon a determination 
by the certifying agency that the income and resources available to such 
households will probably remain essentially unchanged during such 
period;
    (6) Provisions for identifying each person who has been designated 
to receive donated foods for a household;
    (7) Assurance that the distribution of donated foods shall not be 
used as a means to further the political interest of any individual or 
party, and that there shall be no discrimination against recipients of 
donated foods because of race, color, national origin, sex, age or 
handicap;
    (8) Assurance that:
    (i) Citizenship or durational residence requirements shall not be 
imposed as a condition of eligibility and
    (ii) Recipients shall not be requiref to make any payments in money, 
materials or services, for or in connection with the receipt of donated 
foods, and that they shall not be solicited in connection with the 
receipt of donated foods for voluntary cash contributions for any 
purpose;
    (9) The manner in which the distributing agency plans to supervise 
the program; and
    (10) Definitions of any terms used which cannot be determined by 
reference to Webster's New International Dictionary (third edition).
    (e) Operating expense funds--(1) Application for funds. To receive 
administrative funds, the distributing agency shall submit Form AD-623, 
``Application for Federal Assistance,'' to the appropriate FCSRO at 
least three months prior to the beginning of the Federal fiscal year. 
Approval of the application by FCS shall be a prerequisite to payment of 
any funds to the distributing agency. The Department will make payments 
to the distributing agency to assist it in meeting operating expenses 
incurred in administering food distribution for needy persons.
    (2) Availability of funds. FCS will review and evaluate the budget 
information submitted by the distributing

[[Page 416]]

agency in relationship to the distributing agency's plan of operation 
and any other factors which may be relevant to FCS' determination as to 
whether the estimated expenditures are reasonable and justified. FCS 
will give written notification to the distributing agency of:
    (i) Its approval or disapproval of any or all of the estimated 
expenditures; and
    (ii) The amount of funds which will be made available.
    (3) Payment of funds. Payments shall be made to the distributing 
agency through a Letter of Credit or an advance by Treasury Check. These 
payments will be issued in accordance with Treasury Department 
procedures, Treasury Circular No. 1075 and through the appropriate 
Treasury Regional Disbursing Office (RDO).
    (4) Use of funds. The distributing agency shall make every 
reasonable effort to ensure the availability of a food distribution 
program for needy persons in households and shall assign priority in the 
use of any funds received under this Section to accomplish that 
objective. Any remaining funds shall be used to expand and improve 
distribution to needy households. Such funds may be used for any costs 
which are not disallowed under Office of Management and Budget Circular 
A-87 (a copy of which may be obtained from FCS) and which are incurred 
in distributing donated foods to households, including determining 
eligibility of recipients, except for the purchase cost of land and 
buildings. In no event shall such funds be used to pay any portion of 
any expenses if reimbursement or payment therefore is claimed or made 
available from any other Federal source.
    (5) Accounting for funds. The distributing agency which receives 
administrative funds under this Section shall establish and maintain an 
effective system of fiscal control and accounting procedures. The 
accounting procedures maintained by the distributing agency shall be 
such as to accurately reflect the receipt, expenditure and current 
balance of funds provided by FCS. The accounting procedures shall also 
provide for segregation of costs specifically identifiable to the Food 
Distribution Program from any other costs incurred by the distributing 
agency. Any budget revisions by the distributing agency which require 
the transfer of funds from an FCS approved cost category to another 
shall be in accordance with the budget revision procedures set forth in 
7 CFR part 3015 and shall be approved by FCS prior to any transfer of 
funds.
    (6) Return, reduction and reallocation of funds. (i) FCS may require 
the distributing agency to return prior to the end of the Federal fiscal 
year any or all unobligated funds received under this section, and may 
reduce the amount it has apportioned or agreed to pay to the 
distributing agency if FCS determines that:
    (A) The distributing agency is not administering the Food 
Distribution Program in accordance with its plan of operation approved 
by FCS and the provisions of this part;
    (B) The amount of funds which the distributing agency requested from 
FCS is in excess of actual need, based on reports of expenditures and 
current projections of program needs; or
    (C) Circumstances or conditions justify the return, reallocation or 
transfer of funds to accomplish the purposes of this part.
    (ii) The distributing agency shall return to FCS within 90 days 
following the close of each Federal fiscal year any funds received under 
paragraph (e) of this section which are obligated at that time.
    (7) Financial reports. The distributing agency shall submit 
quarterly and annual reports to FCS on Form SF-269 concerning the 
obligations, expenditure and status of funds received under this 
Section. In addition, the distributing agency receiving funds under 
paragraph (e) of this section shall submit any other reports in such 
form as may be required from time to time by the Department.
    (f) Records, reports and audits. The distributing agency shall:
    (1) Maintain and retain for three years from the close of the 
Federal fiscal year to which they pertain, complete and accurate records 
of all amounts received and disbursed under paragraph (e) of this 
section,

[[Page 417]]

    (2) Keep such accounts and records as may be necessary to enable FCS 
to determine whether there has been compliance with this section, and
    (3) Permit representatives of the Department and of a General 
Accounting Office of the United States to inspect, audit and copy such 
records and accounts at any reasonable time.


<R05>
Sec. 250.47  Food Distribution Program on Indian reservations.

    (a) Distribution. Distributing agencies which operate a food 
distribution program on Indian reservations shall comply with the 
provisions set forth in Secs. 250.1, 250.2, 250.3, 250.10, 250.11, 
250.12, 250.13 (with the exception of paragraph (d)(2)), Sec. 250.14, 
Secs. 250.15 and 250.17(d) to the extent that these provisions are not 
inconsistent with the regulations cited in paragraph (b) of this 
section.
    (b) In addition to complying with the provisions identified in 
paragraph (a) of this section, distributing agencies shall also comply 
with the provisions set forth in part 253, Food Distribution Program on 
Indian Reservations or part 254, Food Distribution Program in Oklahoma, 
as applicable.

[53 FR 20426, June 3, 1988, as amended at 53 FR 27476, July 21, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 250.48  School food authorities and commodity schools.

    (a) Distribution. (1) School food authorities which participate in 
the National School Lunch Program or as commodity schools under part 210 
of this chapter or the School Breakfast Program under part 220 of this 
chapter are eligible to receive donated foods. The distributing agency 
shall distribute donated foods only to those school food authorities 
whose eligibility for participation in the program has been confirmed in 
writing by the State agency or FCSRO administering the applicable 
program. Lists of participating school food authorities which have been 
provided to the distributing agency by the administering State agency or 
FCSRO may serve as written confirmation of eligibility. School food 
authorities may employ food service management companies to conduct food 
service operations in accordance with Sec. 250.12(c) and parts 210 and 
220 of this chapter.
    (2) School food authorities which do not participate in the National 
School Lunch Program or as commodity schools under part 210 of this 
chapter or in the School Breakfast Program under part 220 of this 
chapter may receive such commodities as the Secretary may designate, 
provided the schools are public schools or private schools determined by 
the Internal Revenue Service to be exempt from income tax under section 
501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 or, in the Commonwealth 
of Puerto Rico, certified as nonprofit by the Governor; and operate a 
nonprofit school food service. Such schools shall be eligible to receive 
only those commodities acquired under section 416 of the Agricultural 
Act of 1949 (7 U.S.C. 1431) to the extent that such commodities become 
available and the Secretary has determined that surpluses of such 
commodities exist and surplus quantities are sufficient to distribute to 
nonprogram schools.
    (b) Quantities and Value of Donated Foods--(1) Quantities. 
Distribution of donated food to a State for school food authorities 
shall be calculated by multiplying the number of lunches served in the 
preceding school year which meet the mealpattern requirements 
(reimbursable) prescribed in the regulations for the National School 
Lunch Program under part 210 of this chapter, by the national average 
value of donated food as described in paragraph (b)(2) of this section. 
The number of reimbursable lunches served shall be derived from the 
monthly claims submitted by school food authorities and States as 
required by regulations for the National School Lunch Program at 
Sec. 210.8 of this chapter. After the end of each school year, FCS shall 
reconcile the number of reimbursable lunches served by schools in each 
State with the number served in the preceding school year and, based on 
such reconciliation, shall increase or reduce subsequent commodity 
assistance provided to each State. As early as practicable each school 
year, but not later than September 1, the estimated number of lunches 
served in the preceding school year and requests for adjustments shall 
be provided by the administering State agency or the FCSRO to

[[Page 418]]

the distributing agency. At the discretion of FCS, current year 
adjustments may be made for significant variations in the number of 
reimbursable lunches served. Such current year adjustments will not be 
routine and will only be made for unusual problems encountered in a 
State, such as a teachers' strike or a disaster that necessitates school 
closures for a prolonged period of time.
    (2) Value. (i) For each school year, the national average value of 
donated foods to be made available to States for distribution to school 
food authorities participating in the National School Lunch Program (7 
CFR part 210), or where applicable, cash payments in lieu thereof, shall 
not be less than 11 cents for each lunch and shall be adjusted on July 
1, 1982, and on each July 1 thereafter, to reflect changes in the Price 
Index for food used in schools and institutions as prescribed by section 
6(e) of the National School Lunch Act, as amended. These adjustments 
shall be computed to the nearest one-fourth cent and shall be made 
effective as of the beginning of each school year. Not less than 75 
percent of the food distribution assistance shall be in the form of 
donated foods.
    (ii) For each school year, the national average value of donated 
foods to be provided to States for distribution to commodity schools 
shall not be less than the amount specified in paragraph (b)(2)(i) of 
this section, plus an amount equal to the national average payment 
established under section 4 of the National School Lunch Act, as 
amended, for each lunch served by such schools: Provided, however: That 
this amount shall be reduced to the extent that FCS provides up to 5 
cents per lunch of this value in cash in lieu of donated foods for 
donated food processing and handling expenses on behalf of such school 
food authorities in accordance with part 240 of this chapter.
    (c) Offering the per-meal value of donated foods--(1) Commodity 
offer value. Distributing agencies shall offer each school food 
authority no less than the national average per-meal value of donated 
foods established by the Department on July 1 of each year, in 
accordance with paragraph (b)(2) of this section. This value shall be 
referred to as the commodity offer value. The total value of donated 
foods which must be offered to school food authorities shall be 
calculated by multiplying the per-meal value of donated foods times the 
number of reimbursable meals served by the school food authority during 
the preceding school year; or by another method which the distributing 
agency prefers and can justify as providing each school food authority 
an equitable share of donated food. Distributing agencies shall 
communicate to school food authorities and FCS regional offices the 
methods used to establish the commodity offer value. Distributing 
agencies shall document commodity offerings and refusals in order to 
verify that the per-meal value of commodities was offered to all school 
food authorities.
    (2) Commodity variety offered. Distributing agencies shall offer and 
efficiently deliver to each school food authority the full range of all 
commodities equitably and consistently to the extent that quantities 
requested or made available are sufficient to make a statewide 
distribution. At least annually, distributing agencies shall develop and 
disseminate to school food authorities a procedure for the allocation of 
commodities when the amount received from the Department is not 
sufficient to make a statewide distribution to all school food 
authorities.
    (3) Bonus commodities. Bonus commodities (i.e., commodities provided 
in addition to a State's authorized level of assistance) offered shall 
be distinguished from entitlement commodities (i.e., commodities 
provided as part of an authorized level of assistance) and shall not be 
included as a part of the per-meal value of donated foods which must be 
offered to school food authorities.
    (d) Cash in lieu of donated foods for schools. Where a State has 
phased out its food distribution facilities prior to July 1, 1974, such 
State may, in accordance with part 240 of this chapter, elect to receive 
cash payments in lieu of donated foods for use in school lunch programs 
which participate in the National School Lunch Program under part 210 of 
this chapter.
    (e) Types of donated foods authorized for donation. School food 
authorities

[[Page 419]]

which participate in the National School Lunch Program or as commodity 
schools under part 210 of this chapter are eligible to receive donated 
foods under section 416, section 32, section 709, section 6 and section 
14. School food authorities which participate in the School Breakfast 
Program under part 220 are eligible to receive donated foods under 
section 416, section 32, section 709 and section 14.
    (f) Refusal of donated foods by school food authorities. (1) Any 
school food authority participating in food service programs under the 
National School Lunch Act, as amended, may refuse, at the time they are 
offered, donated foods and other foods offered for delivery for lunches 
in any school year if such foods cannot be used effectively. The school 
food authority may receive, in lieu of the refused donated foods, other 
donated foods to the extent that they are available during the school 
year: Provided, however: That not more than 20 percent of the value of 
the donated foods offered to a school food authority for lunches during 
the school year shall be subject to replacement with other available 
donated foods unless replacement based on the refusal of more than 20 
percent of such value is feasible and practical. Prior to making 
distribution to school food authorities, distributing agencies shall 
notify each school food authority of its right to refuse delivery and to 
receive other donated foods, if available, in lieu of those refused. 
Notification of donated food refusal rights shall be provided by means 
of a letter or by an addendum to the agreement required by 
Sec. 250.12(b) to each school food authority prior to the beginning of 
each school year.
    (2) If the distributing agency demonstrates on the basis of existing 
records that it is maintaining an effective offer-and-acceptance system 
as defined in Sec. 250.3, there can be no refusal of donated foods as 
provided in paragraph (e)(1) of this section.
    (g) Use of donated foods in home economics courses. School food 
authorities receiving donated foods under this part may use such foods 
for the purpose of training students in home economics, including 
college students if the same facilities and instructors are used for 
training both high school and college students in home economics 
courses. Home economics includes classes in general home economics, food 
purchases, nutrition, food preparation, cooking, child care and health.

[53 FR 20426, June 3, 1988, as amended at 53 FR 26219, July 12, 1988; 53 
FR 27476, July 21, 1988; 58 FR 39122, July 22, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 250.49  Nonresidential child and adult care institutions.

    (a) Distribution. The distributing agency shall distribute donated 
foods only to those nonresidential child care institutions whose 
eligibility for participation in Child Care Food Program has been 
confirmed in writing by the State agency of FCSRO administering the 
program, where applicable. Lists of participating nonresidential child 
care institutions which have been prepared by the administering State 
agency or FCSRO may serve as written confirmation of eligibility. 
Nonresidential child care institutions may employ food service 
management companies to conduct food service operations in accordance 
with Sec. 250.12(c) and part 226 of this chapter.
    (b) Quantities and value of donated foods--(1) Quantities. 
Distribution of donated food to a State for nonresidential child and 
adult care institutions shall be calculated by multiplying the number of 
lunches and suppers served in the preceding school year which meet the 
meal-pattern requirements (reimbursable) prescribed in the regulations 
for the Child and Adult Care Food Program under part 226 of this chapter 
by the national average value of donated food as described in paragraph 
(b)(2) of this section. The number of lunches and suppers served shall 
be derived from the monthly claims submitted by participating 
institutions as required by Child and Adult Care Food Program 
regulations at Sec. 226.11(b) of this chapter. After the end of the 
school year, FCS shall reconcile the number of reimbursable meals served 
in each State with the number served in the preceding school year and, 
based on such reconciliation, shall increase or reduce subsequent 
commodity assistance provided to each State. As early as practicable 
each year, but not later than September 1, the estimated number of

[[Page 420]]

lunches and suppers served in the preceding school year and requests for 
adjustments shall be provided by the administering State agency or the 
FCSRO to the distributing agency. At the discretion of FCS, current year 
adjustments may be made for significant variations in the number of 
meals served. Such current year adjustments will not be routine and will 
only be made for unusual problems encountered in a State, such as a 
disaster that necessitates institutional closures for a prolonged period 
of time.
    (2) Value. For each school year, the national average value of 
donated foods to be made available to States for distribution to 
nonresidential child care institutions, or cash payments in lieu 
thereof, shall not be less than 11 cents for each lunch and supper and 
shall be adjusted on July 1, 1982, and on each July 1 thereafter, to 
reflect changes in the Price Index for food used in schools and 
institutions as prescribed by section 6(e) of the National School Lunch 
Act, as amended. These adjustments shall be computed to the nearest one-
fourth cent and shall be made effective at the beginning of each school 
year.
    (c) Cash in lieu of donated foods. In accordance with part 240 of 
this chapter, State agencies may elect to receive cash payments in lieu 
of donated foods for use by institutions which participate in the Child 
Care Food Program under part 226 of this chapter.
    (d) Types of donated foods authorized for donations. Nonresidential 
child care institutions which participate in the Child Care Food Program 
under part 226 of this chapter are eligible to receive donated foods 
under section 416, section 32, section 709, section 6 and section 14.

[53 FR 20426, June 3, 1988, as amended at 58 FR 39123, July 22, 1993]


<R05>
Sec. 250.50  Service institutions.

    (a) Distribution. The distributing agency shall distribute donated 
foods only to those service institutions whose eligibility to receive 
donated foods for use in the Summer Food Service Program for Children 
under part 225 of this chapter has been confirmed in writing by the 
State agency or FCSRO administering the program, where applicable. Lists 
of participating service institutions which have been prepared by the 
administering State agency or FCSRO may serve as written confirmation of 
eligibility.
    (b) Quantities and value of donated foods. Distribution of donated 
foods to service institutions shall be made on the basis of the average 
daily number of meals by type to be served which meet the meal-type 
requirements prescribed in the regulations for the Summer Food Service 
Program for Children under part 225 of this chapter as evidenced by the 
most recent written caseload factor information which must be provided 
by the State agency or FCSRO administering the program to the 
distributing agency by June 1 of each year.
    (c) Types of donated foods authorized for donation. Service 
institutions which participate in the Summer Food Service Program for 
Children under part 225 of this chapter are eligible to receive donated 
foods under section 416, section 32, section 709, and section 14.


<R05>
Sec. 250.51  Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants and Children.

    (a) Distribution. At the request of the State agency responsible for 
administering the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, 
Infants and Children (WIC Program) under part 246 of this chapter and 
with approval of the Department, donated foods may be made available for 
distribution to program participants. In instances when donated foods 
are made available, State agencies shall pay the Department using funds 
allocated to the State for the WIC Program for those donated foods which 
are provided to participants as part of the food package. Donated foods 
which are provided to participants in addition to the quantities 
authorized for the food package will be made available to the State 
agency free of charge.
    (b) Quantities and value of donated foods. Distribution of donated 
foods to State agencies for the WIC Program shall be made on the basis 
of each State agency's quarterly estimate of need.
    (c) Types of donated foods authorized for donation. State agencies 
participating in the WIC Program under part 246

[[Page 421]]

of this chapter are eligible to receive donated foods under section 416 
and section 32.


<R05>
Sec. 250.52  Section 110 commodities.

    (a) Donations. Distributing agencies shall make commodities donated 
to the State under section 110 of the Hunger Prevention Act of 1988 
available to soup kitchens and food banks, as defined in Sec. 250.3. 
Such distributions shall be made on the following priority basis:
    (1) Soup kitchens. The distributing agency shall offer, or otherwise 
make available, its full allocation of commodities to soup kitchens and 
other like organizations that prepare meals for the homeless and to food 
banks for distribution to such organizations.
    (2) Institutions that serve only low-income recipients. If the 
distributing agency determines that it is not likely to exhaust its 
allocation of commodities under this section through distribution to 
institutions referred to in paragraph (a)(1) of this section, it shall 
make the remaining commodities available to food banks for distribution 
to institutions that exclusively serve the needy. When such institutions 
distribute commodities to individuals for home consumption, eligibility 
for such commodities shall be established through a means test as 
determined appropriate by the distributing agency.
    (3) Other institutions. If a food bank determines that it is not 
likely to exhaust its allocation of commodities through distribution to 
institutions referred to in paragraphs (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this 
section, it may make the remaining commodities available to institutions 
that:
    (i) Document, to the satisfaction of the food bank, that they serve 
meals predominantly to needy persons; and
    (ii) Do not employ a means test to determine eligibility for such 
meals.
    (b) Tax-exempt status. Prior to making section 110 donated food 
available, the distributing agency shall ensure that the soup kitchen/
food bank has obtained recognition of tax-exempt status under the 
Internal Revenue Code, has made application for recognition of such 
status and is moving toward compliance with the requirements for 
recognition of tax-exempt status, or is currently operating another 
Federal program requiring such tax-exempt status. If the Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS) denies a participating organization's application 
for recognition of tax-exempt status, the organization shall immediately 
notify the distributing agency of such denial, and the distributing 
agency shall terminate the organization's agreement and participation 
immediately upon receipt of such notification. If documentation of IRS 
recognition of tax-exempt status has not been obtained and forwarded to 
the distributing agency within 12 months of the effective date of the 
organization's approval for participation, the distributing agency shall 
terminate the organization's agreement and participation until such time 
as documentation of IRS recognition of tax-exempt status is obtained, 
unless the organization documents to the distributing agency's 
satisfaction that it has made good faith efforts to obtain recognition 
of its tax-exempt status and that such recognition has not been provided 
due to no fault of the organization. It shall be the responsibility of 
the soup kitchen/food bank to document that it has complied with all IRS 
requirements and has provided all information requested by IRS in a 
timely manner.
    (c) Agreements. The distributing agency shall distribute section 110 
commodities only to those soup kitchens and food banks which have 
entered into an agreement for participation in the program with the 
distributing agency in accordance with Sec. 250.12(b). In addition to 
the terms and conditions set forth in Sec. 250.12(b), written agreements 
shall, at a minimum, include:
    (1) The name and location of the organization;
    (2) Total number of meals expected to be served or commodities 
provided to households for home consumption during the agreement period, 
to be determined as follows:
    (i) The total number of meals to be served in a congregate meal 
setting shall be determined by projecting the average number of meals to 
be served daily and the number of days meals will be served during the 
agreement period; and

[[Page 422]]

    (ii) The number of needy households to be provided food for home 
consumption shall be determined by projecting the number of households 
to be served during the agreement period (in accordance with the method 
set by the distributing agency) which meet the eligibility criteria 
which the distributing agency has determined appropriate pursuant to 
paragraph (a)(2) of this section;
    (3) For congregate meal service, indication of whether the 
organization will employ the services of a food service management 
company to conduct its food service operations;
    (4) Assurance that proper inventory controls will be maintained;
    (5) Assurance that all reports will be submitted as required by the 
distributing agency; and
    (6) In instances in which the donated food will be made available to 
an institution for household distribution, assurance that the food bank 
will ensure that the institution distributing the commodities will:
    (i) Comply with the limitation on unrelated activities established 
under Sec. 251.10(f) of this chapter; and
    (ii) Limit distribution of the donated food to those households 
which meet the eligibility criteria as determined appropriate by the 
distributing agency pursuant to paragraph (a)(2) of this section.
    (d) Quantities of donated foods. (1) Donated food purchased under 
section 110 of the Hunger Prevention Act of 1988 will be allocated to 
States by the Department on the basis of a formula that compares each 
State's population of low-income and unemployed persons to the national 
statistics. Each State's share of commodities, as measured by their 
value, shall be based 60 percent on the number of persons in households 
within the State having incomes below the poverty level and 40 percent 
on the number of unemployed persons within the State. The Department 
will notify each State of the types and amounts of such commodities 
allotted to the State under the formula when funds have been 
appropriated for the purchase of such commodities. The Department will 
make annual adjustments to the commodity allocations for each State, 
based on updated unemployment statistics, which will be effective for 
the entire fiscal year, except that such allocations shall be subject to 
reallocation or transfer in accordance with paragraph (d)(4) of this 
section and Sec. 250.13(a).
    (2) The distributing agency shall notify the appropriate FCSRO of 
the amount of the donated food it will accept no later than 30 days 
prior to the beginning of the shipping period.
    (3) The distributing agency shall accept or adjust the data reported 
in the agreement by soup kitchens and food banks to determine the number 
of meals to be served to needy persons and the number of needy 
households to be served in order to allocate the donated food in an 
equitable manner that ensures that commodities will not be made 
available in quantities in excess of anticipated use or the ability of 
the organization to accept and store the commodities.
    (4) In instances in which a State determines that it will not accept 
its full allocation, the Department will reallocate these commodities in 
a fair and equitable manner among those States that accept the full 
amount of their allocations and request additional amounts.
    (e) Funding. Soup kitchens and food banks receiving section 110 
commodities shall be eligible to receive Emergency Food Assistance 
Program administrative funds for use in accordance with the provisions 
set forth in Sec. 251.8(d)(1)(ii) of this chapter, provided that they 
have entered into an agreement in accordance with Sec. 251.8(d)(2) of 
this chapter.
    (f) Maintenance of effort. Prior to making donated food available, 
the distributing agency shall obtain written assurance from the soup 
kitchen or food bank that food donations from other sources will not be 
diminished as a result of donated foods being made available under 
section 110 of the Hunger Prevention Act of 1988. This assurance 
statement shall be maintained on file by the distributing agency.
    (g) Food service management companies. Institutions preparing 
congregate meals with section 110 commodities may employ food service 
management

[[Page 423]]

companies to conduct food service operations in accordance with 
Sec. 250.12(c).

[59 FR 16973, Apr. 11, 1994]


<R04>
                 Subpart E--Where to Obtain Information


<R05>
Sec. 250.60  Program information.

    Interested persons desiring information concerning the program may 
make written request to the following Regional Offices:
    (a) Northeast Region, Food and Consumer Service, USDA, 10 Causeway 
Street, Boston, Massachusetts 02222-1065 for the following States: 
Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New York, Rhode Island 
and Vermont.
    (b) Mid-Atlantic Region, Food and Consumer Service, USDA, Mercer 
Corporate Park, Corporate Blvd., CN 02150, Trenton, New Jersey 08650, 
for the following States: Delaware, District of Columbia, Maryland, New 
Jersey, Pennsylvania, Puerto Rico, Virginia, Virgin Islands and West 
Virginia.
    (c) Southeast Region, Food and Consumer Service, USDA, 1100 Spring 
Street, NW, Atlanta, Georgia 30367, for the following States: Alabama, 
Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina 
and Tennessee.
    (d) Midwest Region, Food and Consumer Service, USDA, 50 East 
Washington Street, Chicago, Illinois 60602, for the following States: 
Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Ohio and Wisconsin.
    (e) Mountain Plains Region, Food and Consumer Service, USDA, 2420 
West 26th Avenue, Room 430-D, Denver, Colorado 80211, for the following 
States: Colorado, Iowa, Kansas, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, North 
Dakota, South Dakota, Utah and Wyoming.
    (f) Southwest Region, Food and Consumer Service, USDA, 1100 Commerce 
Street, Room 5-C-30, Dallas, Texas 75242, for the following States: 
Arkansas, Louisiana, New Mexico, Oklahoma and Texas.
    (g) Western Region, Food and Consumer Service, USDA, 550 Kearney 
Street, Room 400, San Francisco, California 94108 for the following 
States: Alaska, American Samoa, Arizona, California, Guam, Hawaii, 
Idaho, Nevada, Oregon, Trust Territory and Washington.


<R03>
PART 251--THE EMERGENCY FOOD ASSISTANCE PROGRAM--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
251.1  General purpose and scope.
251.2  Administration.
251.3  Definitions.
251.4  Availability of commodities.
251.5  Eligibility determinations.
251.6  Distribution plan.
251.7  Formula adjustments.
251.8  Payment of funds for administrative costs.
251.9  Matching of funds.
251.10  Miscellaneous provisions.

    Authority: Pub. L. 98-8, as amended (7 U.S.C. 612c note).

    Source: 51 FR 12823, Apr. 16, 1986, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 251.1  General purpose and scope.

    This part announces the policies and prescribes the regulations 
necessary to carry out certain provisions of the Temporary Emergency 
Food Assistance Act of 1983, (7 U.S.C. 612c note).


<R05>
Sec. 251.2  Administration.

    (a) Within the United States Department of Agriculture (the 
``Department''), the Food and Consumer Service (FCS) shall have 
responsibility for the distribution of food commodities and allocation 
of funds under the part.
    (b) Within the States, distribution to emergency feeding 
organizations and receipt of payments for storage and distribution shall 
be the responsibility of the State agency which has: (1) Been designated 
for such responsibility by the Governor or other appropriate State 
executive authority; and (2) entered into an agreement with the 
Department for such distribution and receipt in accordance with 
paragraph (c) of this section.
    (c) Each State agency which has been designated to make 
distributions of donated foods to emergency feeding organizations and to 
receive payments for administrative costs in accordance with Sec. 251.8 
of this part shall perform those functions pursuant to an agreement 
entered into with the Department. Such State agencies shall enter

[[Page 424]]

into a written agreement with eligible emergency feeding organizations. 
This agreement shall provide that emergency feeding organizations agree 
to operate the program in accordance with the requirements of this part, 
and, as applicable, 7 CFR part 250. In any case in which an emergency 
feeding organization will be receiving Federal funds, the agreement 
shall be effective no longer than one year and shall expire no later 
than September 30 of each year. The agreement may be renewed at the 
option of both parties for two additional one-year periods. As part of 
the renewal process, the emergency feeding organization shall provide 
any information which has changed since the initial application and 
updated caseload information.

[51 FR 12823, Apr. 16, 1986, as amended at 51 FR 17933, May 13, 1987; 59 
FR 16974, Apr. 11, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 251.3  Definitions.

    For the purposes of this part:
    (a) The terms used in this part that are defined in part 250 of this 
chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them therein.
    (b) Distribution site means the location(s) where the emergency 
feeding organization actually distributes commodities to needy persons 
under this part.
    (c) Emergency feeding organization means any public or nonprofit 
private organization which has entered into an agreement with the 
designated State agency to provide nutrition assistance to relieve 
situations of emergency and distress through the provision of food to 
needy persons, including low-income and unemployed persons, and which 
receives commodities under agreements pursuant to Sec. 251.2(c). 
Emergency feeding organizations include charitable institutions, food 
banks, hunger centers, soup kitchens, and similar public or private 
nonprofit eligible recipient agencies.
    (d) Formula means the formula used by the Department to allocate 
among States the commodities and funding available under this part. The 
amount of such commodities and funds to be provided to each State will 
be based on each State's population of low-income and unemployed 
persons, as compared to national statistics. Each State's share of 
commodities and funds shall be based 60 percent on the number of persons 
in households within the State having incomes below the poverty level 
and 40 percent on the number of unemployed persons within the State. The 
surplus commodities will be allocated to States on the basis of their 
weight (pounds), and the commodities purchased under section 214 of the 
Emergency Food Assistance Act of 1983 will be allocated on the basis of 
their value (dollars). In instances in which a State determines that it 
will not accept the full amount of its allocation of commodities 
purchased under section 214 of the Emergency Food Assistance Act of 
1983, the Department will reallocate the commodities to other States on 
the basis of the same formula used for the initial allocation.
    (e) State agency means the State government unit designated by the 
Governor or other appropriate State executive authority which has 
entered into an agreement with the United States Department of 
Agriculture under Sec. 251.2(c).
    (f) Value of commodities distributed means the Department's cost of 
acquiring commodities for distribution under this part.

[51 FR 12823, Apr. 16, 1986, as amended at 59 FR 16974, Apr. 11, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 251.4  Availability of commodities.

    (a) General. The Department shall make commodities available for 
distribution and use in accordance with the provisions of this part and 
also in accordance with the terms and conditions of part 250 of this 
chapter to the extent that the part 250 terms and conditions are not 
inconsistent with this part.
    (b) Displacement. State agencies shall require that emergency 
feeding organizations receiving commodities under this part shall not 
diminish their normal expenditures for food because of receipt of 
commodities. Additionally, the Secretary shall withhold commodities from 
distribution if it is determined that the commodities would substitute 
for the same or a similar product that would otherwise be purchased in 
the market.

[[Page 425]]

    (c) Allocations. (1) Allocations of commodities shall be made to 
State agencies on the basis of the formula defined in Sec. 251.3(d).
    (2) FCS shall promptly notify State agencies regarding their 
allocation of commodities to be made available under this part.
    (3) State agencies shall notify the appropriate FCSRO of the amount 
of the commodities they will accept not later than 30 days prior to the 
beginning of the shipping period.
    (d) Quantities requested. State agencies shall:
    (1) Request commodities only in quantities which can be utilized 
without waste in providing food assistance to needy persons under this 
part;
    (2) Ensure that no emergency feeding organization receives 
commodities in excess of anticipated use, based on inventory records and 
controls, or in excess of its ability to accept and store such 
commodities; and
    (3) Establish distribution rates, based on household size, to be 
used by emergency feeding organizations which provide commodities to 
needy persons in households.
    (e) Initial processing and packaging. The Department will furnish 
commodities to be distributed to institutions and to needy persons in 
households in forms and units suitable for institutional and home use.
    (f) Bulk processing by States. Commodities may be made available to 
a State agency or, at the direction of the State agency, directly to 
private companies for processing bulk commodities for use by emergency 
feeding organizations.
    (1) The Department will reimburse the State agency at the current 
flat rate for such processing.
    (2) Minimum yields and product specifications established by the 
Department shall be met by the processor.
    (3) The State shall require the processor to meet State and local 
health standards.
    (4) The external shipping containers of processed products shall be 
clearly labeled ``Donated by the U.S. Department of Agriculture--Not to 
be Sold or Exchanged''. Internal packaging shall be clearly marked 
``Donated by the U.S. Department of Agriculture--Processed Under 
Agreement with the State of ______.'' FCS may grant waivers to the 
internal label requirement if the enforcement of this requirement 
precludes a State's participation in the program, or in cases where 
other processors are not available who are able to meet the labeling 
requirement within the allowed reimbursement.
    (5) Processors and State agencies shall also meet the basic minimum 
requirements of Sec. 250.15.
    (g) Availability and control of donated commodities. Donated 
commodities shall be made available to State agencies only for 
distribution and use in accordance with this part. Except as otherwise 
provided in Sec. 251.4(f), donated commodities not so distributed or 
used for any reason shall not be sold, exchanged, or otherwise disposed 
of without the approval of the Department. However, donated commodities 
made available under section 32 of Pub. L. 74-320 (7 U.S.C. 612c) may be 
transferred by emergency feeding organizations, as defined in 
Sec. 251.3, or recipient agencies, as defined in Sec. 250.3, to any 
other emergency feeding organization or recipient agency which agrees to 
use such donated foods to provide without cost or waste, nutrition 
assistance to individuals in low-income groups. Such transfers shall be 
effected only with prior authorization of the State agency and, as 
applicable, the distributing agency. Transfers of any donated 
commodities between emergency feeding organizations and recipient 
agencies shall be documented. Such documentation shall be maintained in 
accordance with Secs. 251.10(a) and 250.6(r) by the distributing agency 
and the State agency responsible for administering TEFAP and made 
available for review upon request.
    (h) Distribution to emergency feeding organizations. Emergency 
feeding organizations shall be eligible to receive commodities which are 
made available under sections 202 and 214 of the Emergency Food 
Assistance Act of 1983. State agencies may give priority in the 
distribution of these commodities to existing food bank networks and 
other organizations whose ongoing primary function is to facilitate the 
distribution of food to low-income households,

[[Page 426]]

including food from sources other than the Department.
    (i) Distribution of non-USDA foods. Emergency feeding organizations 
may incorporate the distribution of foods which have been donated by 
charitable organizations or other entities with the distribution of 
USDA-donated commodities or distribute them separately.
    (j) Interstate cooperation. State agencies may enter into 
interagency cooperative agreements to provide jointly or to transfer 
commodities to an emergency feeding organization when such organization 
serves needy persons in a contiguous area which crosses States' borders.
    (k) Distribution in rural areas. State agencies shall encourage 
emergency feeding organizations to implement or expand commodity 
distribution activities to relieve situations of emergency and distress 
through the provision of commodities to needy households in rural areas 
of the State.
    (l) Commodity losses. (1) The State agency shall be responsible for 
the loss of commodities:
    (i) When the loss arises from the State agency's improper 
distribution or use of any commodities or failure to provide proper 
storage, care, or handling; and
    (ii) When the State agency fails to pursue claims arising in its 
favor, fails to provide for the rights to assert such claims, or fails 
to require its emergency feeding organizations to provide for such 
rights.

Except as provided in paragraph (l)(4) of this section, the State agency 
shall begin claims action immediately upon receipt of information 
concerning the improper distribution, loss of or damage to commodities, 
and shall make a claim determination within 30 days of the receipt of 
information, as described in further detail in FCS Instruction 410-1, 
Non-Audit Claims--Food Distribution. The funds received from the 
collection of claims shall be returned to FCS. In instances in which it 
has been determined by the Department that the collection of funds will 
have a significant adverse effect on the operation of the program, the 
Department may permit in-kind replacement of the donated foods in lieu 
of payment to FCS. Replacement in kind will only be permitted under such 
terms and conditions as agreed to by the Secretary.
    (2) If the State agency itself causes the loss of commodities and 
the value exceeds $250, the State agency shall immediately transmit the 
claim determination to the FCS Regional Office, fully documented as to 
facts and findings. Except as provided in paragraph (l)(4) of this 
section, if the State agency itself causes the loss of commodities, and 
the value does not exceed $250, the State agency shall immediately 
return funds equal to the claim amount to FCS.
    (3) If the State agency determines that a claim exists against an 
emergency feeding organization, warehouseman, carrier or any other 
entity and the value of the lost commodities exceeds $2500, the State 
agency shall immediately transmit the claim determination to the 
appropriate FCS Regional Office, fully documented as to facts and 
findings. If FCS determines from its review of the claim determination 
that a claim exists, the State agency shall make demand for restitution 
upon the entity liable immediately upon receipt of notice from the FCS 
Regional Office. Except as provided in paragraph (l)(4) of this section, 
if the State agency determines that a claim exists in favor of the State 
agency against an emergency feeding organization, warehouseman, carrier 
or any other entity and the value of the lost commodities does not 
exceed $2500, the State agency shall immediately proceed to collect the 
claim.
    (4) No claim determination shall be required where the value of the 
lost commodities is $100 or less. However, no such claim shall be 
disregarded where:
    (i) There is evidence of fraud or a violation of Federal, State or 
local criminal law; or
    (ii) Program operations would be adversely affected.
    (5) The State agency shall maintain records and substantiating 
documents, on all claims actions and adjustments including documentation 
of those cases in which no claim was asserted because of the minimal 
amount involved.
    (6) In making final claim determinations for commodity losses 
incurred by emergency feeding organizations when

[[Page 427]]

there is no evidence of fraud or negligence, State agencies and FCS 
Regional Offices, as applicable, shall consider the special needs and 
circumstances of the emergency feeding organizations, and adjust the 
claim and/or conditions for claim collection as appropriate. These 
special needs and circumstances include but are not limited to the 
emergency feeding organization's use of volunteers and limited financial 
resources and the effect of the claim on the organization's ability to 
meet the food needs of low-income populations.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
0584-0313 and 0584-0341)

[51 FR 12823, Apr. 16, 1986, as amended at 52 FR 17933, May 13, 1987; 52 
FR 42634, Nov. 6, 1987; 59 FR 16974, Apr. 11, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 251.5  Eligibility determinations.

    (a) Eligible emergency feeding organizations. Prior to making 
distribution to these agencies, the State agency shall determine that 
they are eligible as emergency feeding organizations under this part and 
shall enter into agreements in accordance with Sec. 251.2(b) of this 
chapter when such agreements have not already been entered into.
    (b) Criteria for determining recipient eligibility. Each State 
agency shall establish criteria for determining the eligibility of 
households to receive commodities provided under this part for household 
use. The criteria must enable the State to ensure that only households 
who are in need of food assistance because of inadequate household 
income receive commodities. The criteria shall include income-based 
standards and the methods by which households may demonstrate 
eligibility under such standards and may include a requirement that the 
household reside in the State, provided that length of residency is not 
used as an eligibility criterion.


<R05>
Sec. 251.6  Distribution plan.

    (a) Contents of the plan. The State agency shall submit for approval 
by the appropriate FCS Regional Office a plan which contains:
    (1) A description of the criteria established in accordance with 
Sec. 251.5(b) for determining that applicant households are in need of 
food assistance under this part;
    (2) The rates for distributing commodities to households in 
accordance with Sec. 251.4(d)(3);
    (3) A description of the program monitoring system including a 
detailed explanation of any factors which may contribute to the State 
requesting approval of exceptions to conducting the minimum number of 
reviews required by Sec. 251.10(e);
    (4) A description of the State's formula for allocating 
administrative funds among State agencies and emergency feeding 
organizations, including, if applicable, soup kitchens and food banks 
receiving administrative funds in connection with commodities which are 
made available under section 110 of the Hunger Prevention Act of 1988 in 
accordance with Sec. 251.8(d)(1); and
    (5) A description of the State's contribution toward the matching 
requirements as described under Sec. 251.9(e).
    (b) Plan submission. For Fiscal Year 1986, the distribution plan 
must be submitted no later than the effective date of this part, and for 
subsequent fiscal years the plan must be submitted no later than October 
1 of each year.

[51 FR 12823, Apr. 16, 1986, as amended at 51 FR 17934, May 13, 1987; 59 
FR 16974, Apr. 11, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 251.7  Formula adjustments.

    (a) Commodity adjustments. The Department will make adjustments to 
the commodity allocation formula for each State, based on updated 
unemployment statistics, as follows:
    (1) Surplus commodities. Adjustments will be made semi-annually 
effective on January 1 and July 1 of each fiscal year; and
    (2) Purchased commodities. Adjustments will be made annually and 
will be effective for the entire fiscal year, subject to reallocation or 
transfer in accordance with this part.
    (b) Funds adjustments. The Department will make annual adjustments 
of the funds allocation for each State based on updated unemployment 
statistics. These adjustments will be effective for the entire fiscal 
year unless

[[Page 428]]

recovered, withheld, or reallocated in accordance with Sec. 251.8(e).

[51 FR 12823, Apr. 16, 1986, as amended at 59 FR 16974, Apr. 11, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 251.8  Payment of funds for administrative costs.

    (a) Availability and allocation of funds. Funds made available to 
the Department for State and local costs associated with the 
distribution of commodities under this part shall, in any fiscal year, 
be distributed to each State agency on the basis of the funding formula 
defined in Sec. 251.3(d).
    (b) Uniform Federal Assistance Regulations. Funds provided under 
this section shall be subject to the Department's regulations issued 
under 7 CFR part 3015.
    (c) Payment to States. (1) Funds under this section shall be made 
available by means of U.S. Treasury Department checks or letters of 
credit in favor of the State agency. The State agency shall use any 
funds received without delay in accordance with paragraph (d) of this 
section.
    (2) Upon notification by the FCS Regional Office that an agreement 
has been entered into in accordance with Sec. 251.2(c) of this part, FCS 
shall issue a grant award pursuant to FCS Instruction 407-3 (Grant Award 
Process), and promptly make funds available to each State agency within 
the State's allocation either through issuance of a letter of credit or 
a U.S. Treasury check pursuant to submission of the SF-270, Request for 
Advance or Reimbursement. State agencies shall receive funds through a 
letter of credit if program payments are more than $120,000 for the 
year. To the extent funds are available and subject to the provisions of 
Sec. 251.8(e), funds will be made available to State agencies on an 
advance basis.
    (3) Each State agency shall return to FCS any funds made available 
under this section either through the original allocation or through 
subsequent reallocations which are unobligated as of the end of the 
fiscal year for which they were made available. Such return shall be 
made as soon as practicable but in no event later than 30 days following 
demand made by FCS.
    (d) Use of funds--(1) Allowable administrative costs. Funds made 
available under this part shall be used by State agencies or emergency 
feeding organizations only for the following administrative costs:
    (i) USDA commodities. Funds may be used for the direct costs 
associated with the intrastate distribution of commodities donated under 
this part and under section 110 of the Hunger Prevention Act of 1988 by 
emergency feeding organizations. In addition, emergency feeding 
organizations that also receive commodities under part 250 of this 
chapter may use the funds provided under this part for direct costs 
associated with the distribution of such commodities. These costs 
include the costs paid by an emergency feeding organization or paid by a 
State agency on behalf of an emergency feeding organization for:
    (A) Transporting, storing, handling, repackaging, processing, and 
distributing commodities incurred after they are received by the 
organization;
    (B) Costs associated with determinations of eligibility, 
verification, and documentation;
    (C) Costs of providing information to persons receiving USDA 
commodities concerning the appropriate storage and preparation of such 
commodities;
    (D) Costs involved in publishing announcements of times and 
locations of distribution; and
    (E) Costs of recordkeeping, auditing, and other administrative 
procedures required for program participation.
    (ii) Non-USDA commodities. Funds may also be used by emergency 
feeding organizations for the direct costs associated with the 
intrastate distribution of commodities donated by persons or entities 
other than USDA, provided, however, that these costs shall be limited to 
the costs of storing, handling and distributing such commodities. State-
level costs shall be allowable only to the extent that the commodities 
are ultimately distributed by emergency feeding organizations which have 
entered into agreements with the State agency in accordance with 
paragraph (d)(2) of this section.
    (2) Agreements. (i) In order to be eligible for funds under 
paragraph (d)(1) of this section, emergency feeding organizations shall 
have entered into an agreement pursuant to Sec. 251.2(c) for the

[[Page 429]]

receipt of donated foods under this part or an agreement pursuant to 
paragraph (d)(2)(ii) of this section for the receipt of funds in 
connection with section 110 commodities.
    (ii) In instances in which administrative funds are made available 
in connection with section 110 commodities and the State agency 
responsible for the distribution of TEFAP commodities and funds is not 
also responsible for the distribution of section 110 commodities, the 
State agency responsible for the administration of TEFAP shall enter 
into an agreement with the soup kitchens/food banks (as described in 
Sec. 250.52(c) of this chapter) requesting the funds, or with the State 
agency responsible for the distribution of section 110 commodities, 
which will then enter into agreements with those soup kitchens and food 
banks. The agreement with the soup kitchen or food bank shall require 
compliance with the provisions of this section and Sec. 251.10(a) and 
(e).
    (3) Local support. (i) Not less than 40 percent of the Federal 
Emergency Food Assistance Program administrative funds allocated to the 
State in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section shall be:
    (A) Provided by the State agency to emergency feeding organizations 
as either reimbursement or advance payment for administrative costs 
incurred by emergency feeding organizations in accordance with paragraph 
(d)(1) of this section, except that emergency feeding organizations may 
retain advance payments only to the extent that they actually incur such 
costs; or
    (B) Directly expended by the State agency to cover administrative 
costs incurred by, or on behalf of, emergency feeding organizations in 
accordance with paragraph (d)(1) of this section.
    (ii) State agencies shall not charge for commodities made available 
under this part to emergency feeding organizations.
    (e) Recovery and reallocation. If, during the course of the fiscal 
year, the Department determines that a State agency is unable to use all 
of the funds allocated to it during the fiscal year, the Department 
shall recover or withhold and reallocate such unused funds among other 
States.

[51 FR 12823, Apr. 16, 1986, as amended at 59 FR 16974, Apr. 11, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 251.9  Matching of funds.

    (a) State matching requirement. The State shall provide a cash or 
in-kind contribution equal to the amount of the Federal Emergency Food 
Assistance Program administrative funds received under Sec. 251.8 and 
retained by the State agency for State-level costs. Any portion of the 
Federal grant passed through for administrative costs incurred at the 
local level or directly expended by the State agency for such local-
level costs (in accordance with Sec. 251.8(d)(3)) shall be exempt from 
the State match requirement.
    (b) Exceptions. In accordance with the provisions of 48 U.S.C. 
1469a, American Samoa, Guam, the Virgin Islands and the Northern Mariana 
Islands shall be exempt from the matching requirements of paragraph (a) 
of this section if their respective matching requirements are under 
$200,000.
    (c) Applicable contributions. States shall meet the requirements of 
paragraph (a) of this section through cash or in-kind contributions from 
sources other than Federal funds which are prohibited by law from being 
used to meet a Federally mandated State matching requirement. Such 
contributions shall meet the requirements set forth in 7 CFR 3016.24. In 
accordance with 7 CFR 3016.24(b)(1), the matching requirement shall not 
be met by contributions for costs supported by another Federal grant, 
except as provided by Federal statute. Allowable contributions are only 
those contributions for costs which would otherwise be allowable as 
State or local-level administrative costs.
    (1) Cash. An allowable cash contribution is any cash outlay of the 
State agency for a specifically identifiable allowable State- or local-
level administrative cost, including the outlay of money contributed to 
the State agency by other public agencies and institutions, and private 
organizations and individuals. Examples of cash contributions include, 
but are not limited to,

[[Page 430]]

expenditures for office supplies, storage space, transportation, loading 
facilities and equipment, employees' salaries, and other goods and 
services specifically identifiable as State- or local-level 
administrative costs for which there has been a cash outlay by the State 
agency.
    (2) In-kind. (i) Allowable in-kind contributions are any 
contributions, which are non-cash outlays, of real property and non-
expendable personal property and the value of goods and services 
specifically identifiable with allowable State administrative costs or, 
when contributed by the State agency to an emergency feeding 
organization, allowable local-level administrative costs. Examples of 
in-kind contributions include, but are not limited to, the donation of 
office supplies, storage space, vehicles to transport the commodities, 
loading facilities and equipment such as pallets and forklifts, and 
other non-cash goods or services specifically identifiable with 
allowable State-level administrative costs or, when contributed by the 
State agency to an emergency feeding organization, allowable local-level 
administrative costs. In-kind contributions shall be valued in 
accordance with 7 CFR 3016.24(c) through 3016.24(f).
    (ii) In order for a third-party in-kind contribution to qualify as a 
State-level administrative cost for purposes of meeting the match, all 
of the following criteria shall be met:
    (A) In its administration of food assistance programs, the State has 
performed this type of function over a sustained period of time in the 
past;
    (B) The function was not previously performed by the State on behalf 
of emergency feeding organizations; and
    (C) The State would normally perform the function as part of its 
responsibility in administering TEFAP or related food assistance 
programs if it were not provided as an in-kind contribution.
    (d) Assessment fees. States shall not assess any fees for the 
distribution of donated foods to emergency feeding organizations.
    (e) Plan requirements. As a part of the State's Distribution Plan 
required under Sec. 251.6, State agencies shall submit for FCS Regional 
office approval, the State's plan for meeting the match required under 
paragraph (a) of this section. Such plan shall identify the estimated 
amount of Federal funds to be retained at the State level for State 
level activities, the estimated dollar value of the State's 
contribution, and, if applicable, a description and valuation of in-kind 
contributions to be applied to the State's required match. This plan may 
be amended at any time during the fiscal year.
    (f) Reporting requirements. State agencies shall identify their 
matching contribution on the SF-269, Financial Status Report, in 
accordance with Sec. 251.10(d).
    (g) Failure to match. If, during the course of the fiscal year, the 
quarterly SF-269 indicates that the State is or will be unable to meet 
the matching requirements in whole or in part, the Department shall 
suspend or disallow the unmatched portion of Federal funds subject to 
the provisions of paragraph (a) of this section. If, upon submission of 
the final SF-269 for the fiscal year, the Department determines that the 
State has not met the requirements of paragraph (a) of this section in 
whole or in part, the unmatched portion of Federal funds subject to the 
requirements of paragraph (a) of this section shall be subject to 
disallowance by FCS.

[52 FR 17934, May 13, 1987, as amended at 59 FR 16975, Apr. 11, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 251.10  Miscellaneous provisions.

    (a) Records. (1) State agencies and emergency feeding organizations 
shall maintain records to document the receipt, disposal, and inventory 
of commodities received under this part in accordance with requirements 
of Sec. 250.6(r) of this chapter.
    (2) In addition to maintaining financial records in accordance with 
7 CFR part 3016, State agencies which receive funds under this part 
shall maintain records to document the amount of funds paid to emergency 
feeding organizations for the actual storage and distribution costs 
incurred by any emergency feeding organization. State agencies shall 
ensure that emergency feeding organizations maintain records as required 
by this paragraph.

[[Page 431]]

    (3) Each distribution site shall keep accurate and complete records 
showing the data and method used to determine the number of eligible 
households served at that site.
    (4) Each distribution site shall collect for each household 
participating in the program the name of the household member receiving 
commodities, the address of the household (to the extent practicable), 
the number of persons in the household, and the basis for determining 
that the household is eligible to receive commodities.
    (5) All records required by this section shall be retained by the 
emergency feeding organization for a period of 3 years from the close of 
the Federal Fiscal Year to which they pertain.
    (b) Commodities not income. In accordance with section 206 of Pub. 
L. 98-8, as amended, and notwithstanding any other provision of law, 
commodities distributed under this part shall not be considered income 
or resources for any purposes under any Federal, State, or local law.
    (c) Nondiscrimination. There shall be no discrimination in the 
distribution of foods donated under this part because of race, color, 
national origin, sex, age, or handicap.
    (d) Reports. (1) Designated State agencies shall identify funds 
obligated and disbursed to cover the costs associated with the program 
at the State and local level. State and local costs shall be identified 
separately. The data shall be identified on Form FCS-667, Report of 
Administrative Costs (TEFAP), and shall be submitted to the appropriate 
FCS Regional Office on a quarterly basis. The quarterly report shall be 
submitted no later than 30 calendar days after the end of the quarter to 
which it pertains. The final report shall be submitted no later than 90 
calendar days after the end of the fiscal year to which it pertains.
    (2) Each State agency shall report, on a monthly basis, the amounts 
of commodities distributed under this part using form FCS-155.
    (3)(i) Emergency feeding organizations shall report to the State 
agency no later than 30 days following the end of the quarter to which 
such data pertain, household participation figures which have been 
collected in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section.
    (ii) Each State agency shall report to FCS the total number of 
households served within the State, based on the latest available 
reports received from emergency feeding organizations, as a quarterly 
addendum to the form FCS-155.
    (e) State monitoring system. (1) Each State agency shall monitor the 
operation of the program. To comply with this requirement the State 
agency shall develop and submit, as part of the distribution plan 
required by Sec. 251.6, a description of its monitoring system.
    (2) Unless specific exceptions are approved in writing by the FCS 
Regional Office, the State monitoring system shall include:
    (i) An annual review of at least 25 percent of all emergency feeding 
organizations and a review of all such organizations not less frequently 
than once every four years; and
    (ii) An annual review of one-third or 50, whichever is fewer, of all 
distribution sites within the State, to be conducted, to the maximum 
extent feasible, simultaneously with actual distribution and/or 
eligibility determinations.
    (3) In selecting distribution sites for review, the State shall rank 
all the sites according to the number of participating households during 
the previous Federal fiscal quarter and select for review the first 25 
sites, or first one-sixth of all sites, whichever is fewer, which served 
the greatest number of households.
    (4) Each review must encompass eligibility determinations, food 
ordering procedures, storage and warehousing practices, inventory 
controls, approval of distribution sites, and reporting and 
recordkeeping requirements.
    (5) Upon concurrence by FCS, reviews of emergency feeding 
organizations or distribution sites which have been conducted by FCS 
Regional Office personnel may be incorporated into the minimum coverage 
required by paragraph (e)(2) of this section.
    (6) The State agency shall submit a report of review findings to 
each emergency feeding organization. The report shall include: (i) A 
description of each

[[Page 432]]

deficiency found and factors contributing to each; (ii) requirements for 
corrective actions; and (iii) timetable for completion of corrective 
action. The State agency shall monitor each emergency feeding 
organization's implementation of corrective action identified in the 
report.
    (7) State agencies shall ensure that emergency feeding organizations 
which receive administrative funds in connection with commodities made 
available under section 110 of the Hunger Prevention Act of 1988 are 
reviewed at the frequency stipulated in paragraph (e)(2)(i) of this 
section to ensure compliance with the provisions contained in 
Sec. 251.8.
    (f) Limitation on unrelated activities. (1) Activities unrelated to 
the distribution of TEFAP foods may be conducted at distribution sites 
as long as:
    (i) The person(s) conducting the activity makes clear that the 
activity is not part of TEFAP and is not endorsed by the Department 
(impermissible activities include information not related to TEFAP 
placed in or printed on bags, boxes, or other containers in which 
commodities are distributed). Recipes or information about commodities, 
dates of future distributions, hours of operations, or other Federal, 
State, or local government programs or services for the needy may be 
distributed without a clarification that the information is not endorsed 
by the Department;
    (ii) The person(s) conducting the activity makes clear that 
cooperation is not a condition of the receipt of TEFAP commodities 
(cooperation includes contributing money, signing petitions, or 
conversing with the person(s)); and
    (iii) The activity is not conducted in a manner that disrupts the 
distribution of TEFAP commodities.
    (2) Emergency feeding organizations and distribution sites shall 
ensure that activities unrelated to the distribution of TEFAP foods are 
conducted in a manner consistent with paragraph (f)(1) of this section.
    (3) Termination for violation. Except as provided in paragraph 
(f)(4) of this section, State agencies shall immediately terminate from 
further participation in TEFAP operations any emergency feeding 
organization or distribution site that distributes or permits 
distribution of materials in a manner inconsistent with the provisions 
of paragraph (f)(1) of this section.
    (4) Termination exception. The State agency may withhold termination 
of an emergency feeding organization's or distribution site's TEFAP 
participation if the State agency cannot find another emergency feeding 
organization or distribution site to operate the distribution in the 
area served by the violating organization. In such circumstances, the 
State agency shall monitor the distribution of commodities by the 
violating organization to ensure that no further violations occur.
    (g) Use of volunteer workers and non-USDA commodities. In the 
operation of the Emergency Food Assistance Program, State agencies and 
emergency feeding organizations shall, to the maximum extent 
practicable, use volunteer workers and foods which have been donated by 
charitable and other types of organizations.
    (h) Maintenance of effort. If the State uses its own funds to 
provide commodities or services to organizations receiving funds or 
services under section 214 of the Emergency Food Assistance Act of 1983, 
the State shall not diminish the level of support it provides to such 
organizations or reduce the amount of funds available for other 
nutrition programs in the State in each fiscal year.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
0584-0313)

[51 FR 12823, Apr. 16, 1986. Redesignated and amended at 51 FR 17934, 
May 13, 1987; 53 FR 15357, Apr. 29, 1988; 59 FR 16975, Apr. 11, 1994]


<R03>
PART 252--NATIONAL COMMODITY PROCESSING PROGRAM--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
252.1  Purpose and scope.
252.2  Definitions.
252.3  Administration.
252.4  Application to participate and agreement.
252.5  Recipient agency responsibilities.
252.6  Miscellaneous provisions.
252.7  OMB control number.

    Authority: Sec. 416, Agricutural Act of 1949 (7 U.S.C. 1431).


[[Page 433]]


    Source: 51 FR 23518, June 30, 1986, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 252.1  Purpose and scope.

    (a) Purpose. This part provides a program whereby the Food and 
Consumer Service (FCS) and private processors of food may enter into 
agreements under which the processor will process and distribute 
designated donated food to eligible recipient agencies. The intent of 
the program is to encourage private industry, acting in cooperation with 
the States and FCS, to develop new markets in which donated food may be 
utilized. It is expected that the processors will use their marketing 
abilities to encourage eligible recipient agencies to participate in the 
program. Additionally, recipient agencies will benefit by being able to 
purchase processed end products at a substantially reduced price.
    (b) Scope. The terms and conditions set forth in this part are those 
under which processors may enter into agreements with FCS for the 
processing of commodities designated by the Secretary of Agriculture and 
the minimum requirements which NCP processors must meet. Also prescribed 
are distributing agency and recipient agency responsibilities.
    (c) Eligible recipient agencies. Recipient agencies shall be 
eligible to participate in the NCP Program to the extent of their 
eligibility to receive the food involved in the NCP Program, pursuant to 
Sec. 250.8 and part 251.


<R05>
Sec. 252.2  Definitions.

    The terms used in this part that are defined in Secs. 250.3 and 
251.3 shall have the meanings ascribed to them therein, except as set 
forth in this section.
    Agreement value of the donated commodity means the price assigned by 
the Department to a donated food which reflects the Department's current 
acquisition price, transportation and, if applicable, processing costs 
related to the food.
    Distributing agencies means State, Federal or private agencies which 
enter into agreements with the Department for the distribution of 
donated food to eligible recipient agencies and recipients; and FCS when 
it accepts title to commodities from the Commodity Credit Corporation 
(CCC) for distribution to eligible recipient agencies under the National 
Commodity Processing Program. A recipient agency may also be a 
distributing agency.
    Donated food value return system means a system used by a processor 
or distributor to reduce the price of the end product by the agreement 
value of the donated commodity.
    NCP Program means a program under which FCS and private processors 
of food may enter into agreements under which the processor will process 
and distribute designated donated food to eligible recipient agencies.
    Recipient agency means disaster organizations, charitable 
institutions, nonprofit summer camps for children, school food service 
authorities, schools, service institutions, welfare agencies, nutrition 
programs for the elderly, nonresidential child care institutions and 
emergency feeding organizations.
    Refund means (1) a credit or check issued to a distributor in an 
amount equal to the NCP contract value of donated foods contained in an 
end product sold by the distributor to a recipient agency at a 
discounted price or (2) a check issued to a recipient agency in an 
amount equal to the NCP contract value of donated foods contained in an 
end product sold to the recipient agency under a refund system.
    Substitution means (1) the replacement of donated food with like 
quantities of domestically produced commercial food of the same generic 
identity and of equal or better quality (i.e., cheddar cheese for 
cheddar cheese, nonfat dry milk for nonfat dry milk, etc.); or (2) in 
the case of donated nonfat dry milk, substitution as defined under (1) 
of this paragraph or replacement with an equivalent amount, based on 
milk solids content, of domestically produced concentrated skim milk.

[51 FR 23518, June 30, 1986, as amended at 52 FR 24977, July 2, 1987; 53 
FR 34014, Sept. 2, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 252.3  Administration.

    (a) Role of FCS. The Secretary will designate those commodities 
which will be available under the NCP Program. Only commodities made 
available without charge or credit under

[[Page 434]]

any nutrition program administered by USDA will be available under NCP. 
FCS will act as the distributing agency and the contracting agency under 
the NCP Program. The Department will pay costs for delivering donated 
commodities to participating NCP Program processors.
    (b) Food orders. When NCP Program processors request donated food, 
FCS will determine whether the quantities ordered are consistent with 
the processor's ability to sell end products and/or the processor's past 
demonstrated performance under the Program. If the quantities are 
appropriate, FCS will request from CCC the donated food for transfer of 
title to FCS and delivery to a mutually agreed upon location for use by 
the NCP Program processor. The title to these commodities transfers to 
FCS upon their acceptance by the processor. FCS retains title to such 
commodities until:
    (1) They are distributed to eligible recipient agencies in processed 
form, at which time the recipient agency takes title;
    (2) They are disposed of because they are damaged or out-of-
condition; or
    (3) Title is transferred to the NCP Program processor upon 
termination of the agreement.
    (c) Substituted food. When the processor substitutes commercial food 
for donated food in accordance with Sec. 252.4(c)(7) of this part, title 
to the substituted food shall transfer to FCS upon the initiation of the 
processing of the end product containing the substituted food. Title to 
the equivalent amount of donated food shall transfer to the processor at 
the same time (except when the substitution is necessary to meet the 100 
percent yield requirement or to otherwise replace missing or out-of-
condition donated food). Once title has transferred, the processor shall 
use the substituted food in accordance with the terms and conditions of 
this part.
    (d) Inventory levels. FCS will monitor the inventory of each food 
processor to ensure that the quantity of donated food for which a 
processor is accountable is at the lowest cost-efficient level. In no 
event shall a processor hold in inventory more than a six-month supply, 
based on average monthly usage under the NCP Program, unless a higher 
level has been specifically approved by FCS on the basis of 
justification submitted by the processor. Under no circumstances should 
the amount of donated food requested by the processor be more than the 
processor can accept and store at any one time. FCS will make no further 
distribution to a processor whose inventory exceeds these limits until 
such time as the inventory is reduced.
    (e) Recipient agency registration. FCS will register, upon request, 
eligible recipient agencies. FCS will make available to food processors 
a listing of registered eligible recipient agencies for marketing 
purposes. Any processor desiring additional listings will be charged a 
fee for the listing which is commensurate with the Department's policy 
on user fees.

[51 FR 23518, June 30, 1986, as amended at 52 FR 24978, July 2, 1987; 59 
FR 62986, Dec. 7, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 252.4  Application to participate and agreement.

    (a) Application by processors to participate. Any food processor is 
eligible to apply for participation in the NCP Program. Agreement 
applications may be filed with FCS at any time on an FCS-approved form. 
FCS will accept or reject the application of each individual food 
processor within 30 days from the date of receipt, except that FCS may, 
at its discretion, extend such period if it needs more information in 
order to make its determination. In determining whether to accept or 
reject an application, FCS shall take into consideration at least the 
following matters: the financial responsibility of the applicant; the 
ability of the applicant to meet the terms and conditions of the 
regulations and the NCP agreement; ability to accept and store 
commodities in minimum truckload quantities; historical performance 
under the State and NCP processing programs; anticipated new markets for 
NCP end products; geographic areas served by the processor; the ability 
of the applicant to distribute processed products to eligible recipient 
agencies; and a satisfactory record of integrity, business ethics and 
performance. In addition, the processors must demonstrate their

[[Page 435]]

ability to sell end products under NCP by submitting supporting 
documentation such as written intent to purchase, bids awarded, or 
historical sales performance. FCS will make a final determination based 
on all available documentation submitted.
    (b) Agreement between FCS and Participating Food Processors. Upon 
approval of an application for participating in the NCP Program, FCS 
shall enter into an agreement with the applicant food processor. All 
agreements under the NCP Program will terminate on the June 30th 
following the agreement approval date. However, FCS may extend 
processing contracts for two 1-year periods, provided that any changed 
information must be updated before any contract extension is granted, 
including the information in paragraphs (c)(1) and (c)(5) of this 
section.
    (c) Processor requirements and responsibilities. In accordance with 
the following provisions and the NCP agreement, any processor 
participating in the NCP Program may sell to any eligible recipient 
agency nationwide a processed product containing the donated food 
received from FCS.
    (1) The processor shall submit to FCS end product data schedules 
which include a description of each end product to be processed, the 
quantity of each donated food and any other ingredient which is needed 
to yield a specific number of units of each end product. FCS may permit 
processors to specify the total quantity of any flavorings or seasonings 
which may be used without identifying the ingredients which are, or may 
be, components of seasonings or flavorings. The end product data 
schedule shall provide pricing information supplied by the processor as 
requested by FCS and a thorough explanation of what this pricing 
information represents. The end product data schedule shall be made a 
part of the NCP agreement.
    (2) When determining the value of the donated food, the processor 
shall use the agreement value of the donated food which shall be the 
price assigned by the Department to a donated food which reflects the 
Department's current acquisition price, transportation and, if 
applicable, processing costs related to the food.
    (3) The processor shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of FCS that 
internal controls are in place to insure that duplicate reporting of 
sales under the NCP Program and any other food distribution program does 
not occur.
    (4) The processor shall use a method of selling end products to 
recipient agencies which ensures that the price of each case of end 
product is reduced by the agreement value of the donated commodity and 
ensures proper accountability. In line with FCS guidelines and subject 
to FCS approval, the processor shall select one or more of the following 
donated food value return systems to use during the term of the 
agreement. Regardless of the method used, processors shall provide 
pricing information summaries to recipient agencies as soon as possible 
after contract approval by FCS. If the pricing information changes 
during the contract period, processors shall provide updated pricing 
information to FCS and the recipient agencies 30 days prior to the 
effective date. Regardless of the method chosen for selling end 
products, the processor shall reduce his inventory only by the amount of 
donated food represented by the discount or refund placed on the end 
product.
    (i) Direct sale. A direct sale is a sale by the processor directly 
to the eligible recipient agency. The following two methods of direct 
sales are allowed:
    (A) Discount system. When the recipient agency pays the processor 
directly for an end product purchased, the processor shall invoice the 
recipient agency at the net case price which shall reflect the value of 
the discount established in the agreement.
    (B) Refund system. The processor shall invoice the recipient agency 
for the commercial/gross price of the end product. The recipient agency 
shall submit a refund application to the processor within 30 days of 
receipt of the processed end product, except that recipient agencies may 
submit refund applications to a single processor on a Federal fiscal 
quarterly basis if the total anticipated refund due for all purchases of 
end product from that processor during the quarter is 25 dollars or 
less. The processor shall pay directly to the eligible recipient agency 
within

[[Page 436]]

30 days of receipt of the refund application from the recipient agency, 
an amount equal to the established agreement value of donated food per 
case of end product multiplied by the number of cases delivered to and 
accepted by the recipient agency, except that processors may group 
together refund applications for a single recipient agency on a Federal 
fiscal quarterly basis if the total anticipated refund due that 
recipient agency during the quarter is 25 dollars or less. In no event 
shall refund applications for purchases during the period of agreement 
be accepted by the processor later than 60 days after the close of the 
agreement period.
    (ii) Indirect sale. An indirect sale is a sale by the processor 
through a distributor to an eligible recipient agency. Indirect sales 
can be made with or without dual billing. Dual billing involves the 
processor billing the recipient agency for the end product and the 
distributor billing the recipient agency for the cost of services 
rendered in the handling and delivery of the end product. The following 
three methods of indirect sales are allowed:
    (A) Sale through distributor with dual billing. When end products 
are sold to recipient agencies through a distributor under a system 
utilizing dual billing, the processor shall invoice the recipient 
agencies directly for the end products purchased at the net case price 
which reflects the value of the discount established in the agreement. 
The processor shall ensure that the distributor bills the recipient 
agencies only for the services rendered in the handling and delivery of 
the end product. The processor shall maintain delivery and/or billing 
invoices to substantiate the quantity of end product delivered to each 
recipient agency and the net case price charged by the processor which 
reflects the discount established by the agreement.
    (B) Sale through distributor without dual billing. When end products 
are sold to recipient agencies through a distributor without dual 
billing, processors shall provide refunds to the distributor and ensure 
that the distributor provides discounts of equal value to recipient 
agencies. Under this system, the processor shall sell end products to a 
distributor at the processor's commercial/gross price for the end 
product. The processor's invoice shall reflect the value of commodities 
contained in the end product as established by the agreement. The 
processor shall ensure that the distributor submits a refund application 
to the processor within 30 days after the eligible recipient agency 
receives the processed end product. The processor shall ensure that the 
refund application includes documentation of the purchase of end 
products by the eligible recipient agency through substantiating 
invoices and that the recipient agency has purchased the end product at 
the net case price which reflects the value of the discount established 
by the agreement. Within 30 days of the receipt of the refund 
application, the processor shall issue payment directly to the 
distributor in an amount equal to the stated agreement value of the 
donated food contained in the purchased end products covered by the 
application. In no event shall refund applications for purchases during 
the period of agreement be accepted by the processors later than 60 days 
after the close of the agreement period. The processor shall verify a 
statistically valid sample of discount sales made by distributors 
without dual billing in a manner which ensures a 95 percent confidence 
level. All such sales reported during a quarter shall be verified at the 
end of that quarter. Processors shall verify that sales were made only 
to eligible recipient agencies and that the value of donated commodities 
was passed through to those recipient agencies. The processor shall 
report to FCS the level of invalid or inaccurate sales identified in 
each quarter within 60 days after the close of each quarter. At the same 
time such report is submitted, the processor shall submit to FCS a 
corrective action plan designed to correct problems identified in the 
verification effort. The processor shall adjust performance reports to 
reflect the invalid sales identified during the verification effort 
required by this paragraph. If, as a result of this verification, FCS 
determines that the value of donated food has not been passed on the 
recipient agencies or that end products have been improperly 
distributed, FCS may assert a claim against the processor.

[[Page 437]]

    (C) Sale through distributor with a refund. Under the refund system, 
processors shall sell end products to distributors at the commercial/
gross price of the end product. Distributors shall sell end products to 
recipient agencies at the commercial/gross price of the end products. 
Processors shall ensure that their invoices and the invoices of 
distributors identify the discount established by the agreement. 
Recipient agencies shall submit refund applications to processors within 
30 days of receipt of the processed end product. Within 30 days of the 
receipt of the refund application from the recipient agency certifying 
actual purchases of end product from substantiating invoices maintained 
by the recipient agency, the processor shall compute the amount and 
issue payment of the refund directly to the recipient agency. In no 
event shall refund applications for purchases during the period of the 
agreement be accepted by the processor later than 60 days after the 
close of the agreement period.
    (iii) Other value pass-through systems. Processors may submit to FCS 
for approval any proposed value pass-through (VPT) system not identified 
in this section. The ``other'' VPT system must, in the judgment of FCS, 
be verifiable and easily monitored. Any VPT system approved under this 
part must comply with the sales verification requirements specified in 
paragraph (c)(4)(ii)(B) of this section or an alternative system 
approved by FCS. If an alternative system is approved, FCS will notify 
the States in which the system will be used. The Department retains the 
authority to inspect and review all pertinent records under all VPT 
systems, including the verification of a required statistically valid 
sample of sales. FCS may consider the paperwork and resource burden 
associated with alternative value pass-through systems when considering 
approval and reserves the right to deny approval of systems which are 
labor-intensive and provide no greater accountability than those systems 
permitted under paragraph (c)(4) of this section.
    (5) The processor shall furnish to FCS prior to the ordering of any 
donated food for processing, a performance supply and surety bond 
obtained from surety companies listed in the current Department of 
Treasury Circular 570 or an irrevocable letter of credit to cover the 
amount of inventory on hand and on order.
    (6) The processor shall draw down inventory only for the amount of 
donated food used to produce the end product. In instances in which 
concentrated skim milk is substituted for nonfat dry milk, the processor 
shall draw down donated nonfat dry milk inventory only in an amount 
equal to the amount of concentrated skim milk, based on milk solids 
content, used to produce the end product. Processors shall ensure that 
an amount equivalent to 100 percent of the donated food provided to the 
processor under the NCP Program is physically contained in end products. 
Additional commodities required to account for loss of donated food 
during production shall be obtained from non-donated food.
    (7)(i) Only butter, cheese, corn grits, cornmeal, flour, macaroni, 
nonfat dry milk, peanut butter, peanut granules, roasted peanuts, rice, 
rolled oats, rolled wheat, shortening, vegetable oil, and spaghetti may 
be substituted as defined in Sec. 252.2 and such other food as FCS 
specifically approves as substitutable under paragraph (c)(7)(i)(A) of 
this section (substitution of meat and poultry items shall not be 
permitted).
    (A) Processors may request approval to substitute commercial foods 
for donated foods not listed in paragraph (c)(7)(i) of this section by 
submitting such request to FCS in writing and satisfying the 
requirements of paragraph (c)(7) of this section. FCS will notify the 
processor in writing of authorization to substitute commercial foods for 
donated foods not listed in paragraph (c)(7)(i) of this section and such 
authorization shall apply for the duration of all current contracts 
entered into by the processor pursuant to this section.
    (B) The processor shall maintain records to substantiate that it 
continues to acquire on the commercial market amounts of substitutable 
food consistent with their levels of non-NCP Program production and to 
document the receipt and disposition of the donated food.
    (C) FCS shall withhold deliveries of donated food from processors 
that FCS

[[Page 438]]

determines have reduced their level of non-NCP Program production 
because of participation in the NCP Program.
    (ii) When the processor seeks FCS approval to substitute donated 
nonfat dry milk with concentrated skim milk under paragraph (c)(7)(i)(A) 
of this section, an addendum must be added to the request which states:
    (A) The percent of milk solids that, at a minimum, must be contained 
in the concentrated skim milk;
    (B) The weight ratio of concentrated skim milk to donated nonfat dry 
milk:
    (1) The weight ratio is the weight of concentrated skim milk which 
equals one pound of donated nonfat dry milk, based on milk solids;
    (2) In calculating this weight, nonfat dry milk shall be considered 
as containing 96.5 percent milk solids;
    (3) If more than one concentration of concentrated skim milk is to 
be used, a separate weight ratio must be specified for each 
concentration;
    (C) The processor's method of verifying that the milk solids content 
in the concentrated skim milk is as stated in the request;
    (D) A requirement that the concentrated skim milk shall be produced 
in a USDA approved plant or in a plant approved by an appropriate 
regulatory authority for the processing of Grade A milk products; and
    (E) A requirement that the contact value of donated food for a given 
amount of concentrated skim milk used to produce an end product is the 
value of the equivalent amount of donated nonfat dry milk, based on the 
weight ratio of the two foods.
    (iii) Substitution must not be made solely for the purpose of 
selling or disposing of the donated commodity in commercial channels for 
profit.
    (8) The processor shall be liable for all donated food provided 
under the agreement. The processor shall immediately report to FCS any 
loss or damage to donated food and shall dispose of damaged or out-of-
condition food in accordance with Sec. 250.7.
    (9) The processor shall submit to FCS monthly performance reports 
reflecting the sale and delivery of end products during the month.
    (i) The processor shall ensure that the monthly performance report 
is postmarked no later than the last day of the month following the 
month being reported. The processor shall identify the month of delivery 
for each sale reported. The sale and delivery of end products for any 
prior month may be included on the monthly performance report. The 
processor monthly performance report shall include:
    (A) The donated food inventory at the beginning of the reporting 
month;
    (B) Amount of donated food received from the Department during the 
reporting month;
    (C) Amount of donated food transferred to and/or from existing 
inventory;
    (D) A list of all recipient agencies purchasing end products and the 
number of units of end products delivered to each during the report 
month;
    (E) The net price paid for each unit of end product and whether the 
sale was made under a discount or refund system;
    (F) When the sale is made through a distributor, the name of the 
distributor;
    (G) The amount of inventory drawdown represented by reported sales; 
and
    (H) the donated food inventory at the end of the reporting month.
    (ii) In addition to reporting the information identified in 
paragraph (c)(9)(i) of this section, processors substituting 
concentrated skim milk for donated nonfat dry milk shall report the 
following information for the reporting period:
    (A) The number of pounds of nonfat dry milk used in commercial 
products sold to outlets which are not recipient agencies; and
    (B) The number of pounds of concentrated skim milk and the percent 
of milk solids contained therein, used in end products sold to recipient 
agencies.
    (iii) At the end of each agreement period, there will be a final 90 
day reconciliation period in which processors may adjust NCP sales for 
any month.
    (10) The processor shall maintain complete and accurate records of 
the receipt, disposal and inventory of donated food including end 
products processed from donated food.
    (i) The processor shall keep production records, formulae, recipes, 
daily or

[[Page 439]]

batch production records, loadout sheets, bills of lading, and other 
processing and shipping records to substantiate the use of the donated 
food and the subsequent redelivery to an eligible recipient agency.
    (ii) The processor shall document that sales reported on monthly 
performance reports, specified in paragraph (c)(9) of this section were 
made only to eligible recipient agencies and that the normal wholesale 
price of the product was discounted or a refund payment made for the 
agreement value of the donated commodity.
    (iii) When donated food is commingled with commercial food, the 
processor shall maintain records which will permit an accurate 
determination of the donated commodity inventory.
    (iv) The processor shall make all pertinent records available for 
inspection and review upon request by FCS, its representatives and the 
General Accounting Office (GAO). All records must be retained for a 
period of three years from the close of the Federal fiscal year to which 
they pertain. Longer retention may be required for resolution of an 
audit or of any litigation.
    (11) The processor shall obtain, upon FCS request, Federal 
acceptance service grading and review of processing activities and shall 
be bound by the terms and conditions of the grading and/or review.
    (12) The processor shall indemnify and save FCS and the recipient 
agency free and harmless from any claims, damages, judgments, expenses, 
attorney's fees, and compensation arising out of physical injury, death, 
and/or property damage sustained or alleged to have been sustained in 
whole or in part by any and all persons whatsoever as a result of or 
arising out of any act or omission of the processor, his/her agents or 
employees, or caused or resulting from any deleterious substance, 
including bacteria, in any of the products produced from donated food.
    (13) The processor shall be liable for payment for all uncommitted 
food inventory remaining at agreement termination.
    (i) When agreements are terminated at the request of the processor 
or at FCS' request because there has been noncompliance on the part of 
the processor with the terms and conditions of the agreement, or if any 
right of FCS is threatened or jeopardized by the processor, the 
processor shall pay FCS an amount equal to the CCC unrestricted sales 
price, the cost CCC of replacement on the date the agreement is 
terminated, or the agreement value of donated commodities, whichever is 
highest, for the inventory, plus any expenses incurred by FCS.
    (ii) When the agreements are terminated at FCS' request where there 
has been no fault or negligence on the part of the processor, the 
processor shall pay FCS an amount equal to the CCC unrestricted sales 
price, the cost to CCC of replacement on the date the agreement is 
terminated, or the agreement value of the donated commodities, whichever 
is highest, for the inventory, unless FCS and the processor mutually 
agree on another value.
    (14) The processor shall not assign the processing contract or 
delegate any aspect of processing under a subcontract or other 
arrangement without the written consent of FCS. The subcontractor shall 
be required to become a party to the processing contract and conform to 
all conditions contained in that contract.
    (15) The processor shall comply fully with the provisions of the NCP 
agreement and all Federal regulations and instructions relevant to the 
NCP Program.
    (16) The processor shall label end products in accordance with 
Sec. 250.15(j) and, when end products contain vegetable protein 
products, in accordance with 7 CFR part 210, 225, or 226 appendix A.
    (17) The processor shall return to FCS any funds received from the 
sale of donated food containers and the market value or the price 
received from the sale of any by-products of donated food or commercial 
food which has been substituted for donated food.
    (18) For any year in which a processor receives more than $250,000 
in donated food, the processor shall obtain an independent audit 
conducted by a Certified Public Accountant (CPA) for that year. 
Processors receiving $75,000 to $250,000 in donated food each year shall 
obtain an independent audit conducted by a CPA every two years and

[[Page 440]]

those receiving less than $75,000 in donated food each year shall obtain 
an independent audit conducted by a CPA every three years. Processors in 
the three year audit cycle shall move into the two year audit cycle when 
the value of donated food received reaches $75,000. If the Department 
determines that the audit is not acceptable or that the audit has 
disclosed serious deficiencies, the processor shall be subject to 
additional audits by OIG at the request of FCS.
    (i) Audits shall be conducted in accordance with the auditing 
provisions set forth under the Standards for Audit of Government 
Organizations, Programs, Activities and Functions, and the FCS Audit 
Guide for Multi-State Processors.
    (ii) The costs of the audits shall be borne by the processor.
    (iii) Audit findings shall be submitted by the processors to FCS.
    (iv) Noncompliance with the audit requirement contained in this part 
will render the processor ineligible to enter into another processing 
contract until the required audit has been conducted and deficiencies 
corrected.

[51 FR 23518, June 30, 1986, as amended at 52 FR 16369, May 5, 1987; 52 
FR 24978, July 2, 1987; 53 FR 16379, May 9, 1988; 53 FR 34014, Sept. 2, 
1988; 59 FR 62986, Dec. 7, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 252.5  Recipient agency responsibilities.

    (a) Registration. Recipient agencies that have approved agreements 
with State distributing agencies to receive donated food may register 
with FCS on an FCS approved form to participate in the NCP Program. Upon 
request, FCS will provide recipient agencies with registration forms. 
Recipient agencies shall notify FCS when they are no longer eligible to 
receive donated food under an agreement. Failure to notify FCS shall 
result in claim action.
    (b) Recipient agency records. Each recipient agency shall maintain 
accurate and complete records with respect to the receipt, disposal, and 
inventory of donated food, including products processed from donated 
food, and with respect to any funds which arise from the operation of 
the distribution program.
    (c) Refunds. A recipient agency purchasing end products under the 
NCP Program from a processor utilizing a refund system shall submit a 
refund application supplied by the processor to the processor within 30 
days of receipt of the end products, except that recipient agencies may 
submit refund applications to a single processor on a Federal fiscal 
quarterly basis if the total anticipated refund due for all purchases of 
end product from that processor during the quarter is 25 dollars or 
less. Recipient agencies must insure that any funds received as a result 
of refund payments be designated for use by the food service department.
    (d) Verification.  If requested by FCS, each recipient agency shall 
cooperate in the verification of end product sales reported by 
processors under the NCP Program. The recipient agency may be requested 
to verify actual purchases of end products as substantiated by the 
recipient agency's invoices and may also be requested to verify that the 
invoice correctly identifies the discount included or refund due for the 
value of the donated ingredient contained in the end product.

[51 FR 23518, June 30, 1986, as amended at 59 FR 62987, Dec. 7, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 252.6  Miscellaneous provisions.

    (a) Improper distribution or loss of or damage to donated food. If a 
processor improperly distributes or uses any donated food, or causes 
loss of or damage to a donated food through its failure to provide 
proper storage, care, or handling, FCS shall require the processor to 
pay to the Department the value of the donated food as determined by the 
Department.
    (b) Disposition of damaged or out-of-condition food. Donated food 
which is found to be damaged or out-of-condition and is declared unfit 
for human consumption by Federal, State, or local health officials, or 
by any other inspection services or persons deemed competent by the 
Department, shall be disposed of in accordance with instructions of the 
Department. This instruction shall direct that unfit donated food be 
sold in a manner prescribed by the Department with the net proceeds 
thereof remitted to the Department. Upon a finding by the Department 
that donated food is unfit for human consumption at the time of delivery 
to a

[[Page 441]]

recipient agency and when the Department or appropriate health officials 
require that such donated food be destroyed, the processor shall pay for 
any expenses incurred in connection with such donated food as determined 
by the Department. The Department may, in any event, repossess damaged 
or out-of-condition donated food.
    (c) FCS sales verification. FCS may conduct a verification of 
processor reported sales utilizing a statistically valid sampling 
technique. If, as a result of this verification, FCS determines that the 
value of the donated food has not been passed on to recipient agencies 
or if end products have been improperly distributed, FCS may assert a 
claim against the processor. This claim may include a projection of the 
verification sample to the total NCP sales reported by the processor.
    (d) Sanctions. Any processor or recipient agency which has failed to 
comply with the provisions of this part or any instructions or 
procedures issued in connection herewith, or any agreements entered into 
pursuant hereto, may, at the discretion of the Department, be 
disqualified from further participation in the NCP Program. 
Reinstatement may be made at the option of the Department. 
Disqualification shall not prevent the Department from taking other 
action through other available means when considered necessary, 
including prosecution under applicable Federal statutes.
    (e) Embezzlement, misuse, theft, or obtainment by fraud of 
commodities and commodity related funds, assets, or property in child 
nutrition programs. Whoever embezzles, willfully misapplies, steals, or 
obtains by fraud commodities donated for use in the NCP Program, or any 
funds, assets, or property deriving from such donations, or whoever 
receives, conceals, or retains such commodities, funds, assets, or 
property for his own use or gain, knowing such commodities, funds, 
assets, or property have been embezzled, willfully misapplied, stolen, 
or obtained by fraud, shall be subject to Federal criminal prosecution 
under section 12(g) of the National School Lunch Act, as amended, or 
section 4(c) of the Agriculture and Consumer Protection Act of 1973, as 
amended. For the purpose of this paragraph ``funds, assets, or 
property'' include, but are not limited to, commodities which have been 
processed into different end products as provided for by this part, and 
the containers in which commodities have been received from the 
Department.


<R05>
Sec. 252.7  OMB control number.

    The information collection and reporting requirements contained in 
this part have been approved by the Office of Management and Budget 
under control number 0584-0325.


<R03>
PART 253--ADMINISTRATION OF THE FOOD DISTRIBUTION PROGRAM FOR HOUSEHOLDS ON INDIAN RESERVATIONS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
253.1  General purpose and scope.
253.2  Definitions.
253.3  Availability of commodities.
253.4  Administration.
253.5  State agency requirements.
253.6  Eligibility of households.
253.7  Certification of households.
253.8  Commodity control, storage and distribution.
253.9  Administrative funds for State agencies.

    Authority: 91 Stat. 958 (7 U.S.C. 2011-2027), unless otherwise 
noted.

    Source: 44 FR 35928, June 19, 1979, unless otherwise noted. 
Redesignated by Amdt. 1, 47 FR 14137, Apr. 2, 1982.


<R05>
Sec. 253.1  General purpose and scope.

    This part describes the terms and conditions under which: 
commodities (available under part 250 of this chapter) may be 
distributed to households on or near all or any part of any Indian 
reservation, the program may be administered by capable Indian tribal 
organizations, and funds may be obtained from the Department for the 
costs incurred in administering the program. This part also provides for 
the concurrent operation of the Food Distribution Program and the Food 
Stamp Program on Indian reservations when such concurrent operation is 
requested by an ITO.


<R05>
Sec. 253.2  Definitions.

    (a) Exercises governmental jurisdiction means the active exercise of 
the legislative, executive or judicial powers of

[[Page 442]]

government by an Indian tribal organization.
    (b) Food distribution program means a food distribution program for 
households on Indian reservations operated pursuant to sections 4(b) and 
1304(a) of Pub. L. 95-113.
    (c) Indian tribal household means a household in which at least one 
household member is recognized as a tribal member by any Indian tribe, 
as defined in paragraph (d) of this section.
    (d) Indian tribe means (1) any Indian tribe, Band, or other 
organized Indian group, for example, a Rancheria, Pueblo, or colony, and 
including any Alaska Native village or regional or village corporation 
(established pursuant to the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (85 
Stat. 688)), and that is on a reservation and recognized as eligible for 
Federal programs and services provided to Indians because of their 
status as Indians; or (2) any Indian tribe or Band on a reservation 
holding a treaty with a State government.
    (e) Indian tribal organization (ITO) means: (1) The recognized 
governing body of any Indian tribe on a reservation; or (2) the tribally 
recognized intertribal organization which the recognized governing 
bodies of two or more Indian tribes on a reservation authorize to 
operate the Food Stamp Program or a Food Distribution Program on their 
behalf.
    (f) Reservation means the geographically defined area or areas over 
which an ITO exercises governmental jurisdiction so long as such area or 
areas are legally recognized by the Federal or a State government as 
being set aside for the use of Indians.
    (g) State means any one of the fifty States, the District of 
Columbia, and the reservation of an Indian tribe whose ITO meets the 
requirements of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 for participation as a State 
agency.
    (h) State agency means:
    (1) The agency of State government, including the local offices 
thereof, which enters into an agreement with FCS for the distribution of 
commodities on all or part of an Indian reservation, and
    (2) The ITO of any Indian tribe, determined by the Department to be 
capable of effectively administering a Food Distribution Program, which 
enters into an agreement with FCS for the distribution of commodities on 
all or part of an Indian reservation.
    (i) Urban place means a town or city with a population of 10,000 or 
more.

[44 FR 35928, June 19, 1979. Redesignated and amended by Amdt. 1, 47 FR 
14137, Apr. 2, 1982; 59 FR 1449, Jan. 11, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 253.3  Availability of commodities.

    (a) Conditions for distribution. In jurisdictions where the Food 
Stamp Program is in operation, there shall be no distribution of 
commodities to households under the authority of any law, except that 
distribution may be made (1) on a temporary basis under programs 
authorized by law to meet disaster relief needs, (2) for the purpose of 
the Commodity Supplemental Food Program, and (3) whenever a request for 
concurrent or separate Food Distribution Program on a reservation is 
made by an ITO.
    (b) Concurrent or separate food program operation. Distribution of 
commodities, with or without the Food Stamp Program, shall be made 
whenever an ITO submits to FCS a completed application for the Food 
Distribution Program on all or part of a reservation and the application 
is approved by FCS.
    (1) Except as provided in paragraph (b)(2) of this section, when the 
Food Distribution Program is operating on all or part of a reservation, 
all eligible households within those boundaries may participate in the 
Food Distribution Program, or, if the ITO has elected concurrent 
operation of the Food Stamp Program, may elect to participate in either 
program, without regard to whether the household is an Indian tribal 
household.
    (2) FCS may determine, based on the number of non-Indian tribal 
households located on all or part of a reservation, that concurrent 
operation is necessary. When such a determination has been made all 
households residing in such areas may apply to participate in either the 
Food Stamp or the Food Distribution Program.
    (c) Household distribution. Commodities acquired under section 416 
of the Agricultural Act of 1949, as amended; section 32 of Pub. L. 320, 
74th Congress,

[[Page 443]]

as amended; section 709 of the Food and Agricultural Act of 1963, as 
amended; and section 4(a) of the Agriculture and Consumer Protection Act 
of 1973, as amended, by section 1304 of the Food and Agriculture Act of 
1977, may be made available under part 250 of this chapter for 
distribution to households in accordance with the provisions of that 
part and the additional provisions and requirements of this part.
    (d) Food distribution program benefits. Households eligible under 
this part shall receive a monthly food package based on the number of 
household members. The food package offered to each household shall 
consist of a quantity and variety of commodities made available by the 
Department to provide eligible households with an opportunity to obtain 
a more nutritious diet and shall represent an acceptable nutritional 
alternative to Food Stamp Program benefits. The food package offered to 
each household by the State agency shall contain a variety of foods from 
each of the four food groups: Meat, Vegetable-Fruit, Milk, and Bread-
Cereal. FCS shall periodically notify State agencies of the kinds of 
commodities it proposes to make available based, insofar as practicable, 
on the preferences of eligible households as determined by the State 
agency. In the event one or more of the proposed commodities cannot be 
delivered, the Department shall arrange for delivery of a similar 
commodity within the same food group.


<R05>
Sec. 253.4  Administration.

    (a) Federal administration. Within the Department of Agriculture, 
the Food and Consumer Service (FCS) shall be responsible for the Food 
Distribution Program. FCS shall have the power to determine the amount 
of any claim and to settle and adjust any claim.
    (b) State agency administration. (1) If FCS determines that the ITO 
is capable of effective and efficient administration, the ITO shall 
administer the Food Distribution Program on all or part of the 
reservation. If FCS determines that the ITO is not capable of effective 
and efficient administration of the Food Distribution Program, the 
appropriate agency of the State government shall be responsible for the 
Food Distribution Program on all or part of the Indian reservation. In 
addition, the appropriate agency of the State government may administer 
the Program on behalf of an otherwise capable tribe if agreed to in 
writing by both parties.
    (2) In the case where the Indian reservation boundaries cross State 
lines, the ITO and appropriate State agencies may jointly request FCS 
approval that a single State agency administer the Food Distribution 
Program on all or part of the Indian reservation.
    (3) An agency of State government responsible for administering the 
Food Distribution Program may contract Program functions to an ITO. 
These functions include, but are not limited to, outreach, preparation 
of bilingual materials, commodity issuance, determination of food 
preferences of households, publicizing uses of commodities, and 
transportation and on-site delivery services. The State agency may also 
use the ITO in prescreening translations, interpretive services and 
other noncertification functions. The State agency shall not contract 
responsibility for certification activities such as interviews or 
eligibility determinations with an ITO that has been determined 
incapable of administering the Food Distribution Program. In all cases 
the State agency shall retain full responsibility for program 
administration.
    (c) Qualification as a reservation. (1) The appropriate ITO of an 
established Indian reservation will qualify for participation under the 
provisions of this part, when that ITO files an application which 
demonstrates the status of an area as an established reservation, unless 
FCS determines that such area(s) does not qualify as a reservation as 
that term is defined in these regulations. For purposes of this part, 
established reservation means the geographically defined area(s) 
currently recognized and established by Federal or State treaty or by 
Federal statute whereby such geographically defined area(s) is set aside 
for the use of Indians. Where such established areas exist, the 
appropriate ITO is presumed to exercise governmental jurisdiction, 
unless otherwise determined by FCS.

[[Page 444]]

    (2) The appropriate ITO for other areas, in order to qualify as 
reservations for the provisions of this part, must show to FCS:
    (i) That the ITO exercises governmental jurisdiction over a 
geographic area(s) which enjoys legal recognition from the Federal or a 
State government and is set aside for the use of Indians;
    (ii) A clear and precise description of the boundaries of such 
geographic area(s).
    (d) Application by an ITO. Any ITO which desires to participate in 
the Food Distribution Program shall file an application with the FCS 
Regional Office serving the State or States in which the reservation is 
located. The ITO shall specify if it is requesting the Food Distribution 
Program alone or concurrently with the Food Stamp Program. The ITO shall 
also specify whether it wants either or both programs on all or part of 
the reservation, and if on part, shall describe the geographic 
boundaries of the relevant part(s). Additionally, if the ITO wishes to 
serve areas near the reservation, the ITO shall describe the geographic 
boundaries of the near area(s) for FCS review and approval. Any urban 
place inside a reservation can be served by the Food Distribution 
Program. Any urban place outside reservation boundaries may not be 
served. However, an ITO or State agency can request the Department to 
change those limitations with justification. The ITO application shall 
also provide other information requested by FCS, including but not 
limited to, that the ITO serves an established reservation or a 
reservation otherwise qualified as described in paragraph (c) of this 
section. Properly addressed applications shall be acknowledged by the 
FCS Regional Office in writing within five working days of receipt.
    (e) Tribal capability. (1) In determining whether the ITO on a given 
reservation is potentially capable of effectively and efficiently 
administering a Food Distribution Program, allowing for fulfillment of 
that potential through training and technical assistance, FCS shall 
consult with other sources, such as the BIA, and shall consider the 
ITO's experience, if any, in operating other government programs and its 
management and fiscal capabilities. Other factors for evaluation 
include, but are not limited to, the ITO's ability to:
    (i) Order and properly store commodities,
    (ii) Certify eligible households,
    (iii) Arrange for physical issuance of commodities,
    (iv) Keep appropriate records and submit required reports,
    (v) Budget and account for administrative funds,
    (vi) Determine the food preferences of households, and
    (vii) Conduct on-site reviews of certification and distribution 
procedures and practices.
    (2) The Food and Consumer Service (FCS) shall make a determination 
of potential Indian Tribal Organization (ITO) capability within 30 days 
of receipt of a completed application for the Food Distribution Program. 
FCS shall promptly advise ITOs of the need for additional information if 
an incomplete application is received.
    (3) FCS shall, if requested by an ITO which has been determined by 
FCS to be potentially capable of administering a Food Distribution 
Program, provide the ITO's designees with appropriate training and 
technical assistance to prepare the ITO to take over program 
administration. In determining what training and technical assistance 
are necessary, FCS shall consult with the ITO and other sources, such as 
the BIA.

[44 FR 35928, June 19, 1979, as amended by Amdt. 163, 45 FR 14006, Mar. 
4, 1980. Redesignated and amended by Amdt. 1, 47 FR 14137, Apr. 2, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 253.5  State agency requirements.

    (a) Plan of operation. (1) The State agency which assumes 
responsibility for the Food Distribution Program shall submit an annual 
plan of operation for approval by FCS. Approval of the annual plan by 
FCS shall be a prerequisite to the donation of commodities available for 
use by households under Sec. 253.9 of this part. No amendment to the 
plan of operation of any State agency shall be effective without prior 
approval of FCS, and FCS may require amendment of any plan as a 
condition of continuing approval. If the

[[Page 445]]

agency is not an ITO, the appropriate agency of the State government 
shall also:
    (i) Consult in good faith with the ITO on the reservation where the 
appropriate agency of the State government is responsible for 
administering the Food Distribution Program.
    (ii) A State agency which is not an ITO shall submit its plan of 
operation, budget and any substantive subsequent amendments to the ITO 
for comment at least 45 days prior to submission of the plan, budget or 
amendment to FCS. Comments by the ITO shall be attached to the plan, 
budget or amendment which is submitted to FCS. This paragraph does not 
apply to amendments required by FCS under Sec. 253.7(a)(1).
    (2) The plan of operation shall describe the manner in which 
commodities will be distributed, including, but not limited to, the 
storage and distribution facilities to be used, the procedures to assure 
ongoing consultation with the ITO where the appropriate agency of the 
State government administers the Program, the method by which the food 
preferences of households shall be determined, the manner in which the 
State agency plans to supervise the Food Distribution Program, and plans 
by which the State agency will control dual participation. The plan 
shall also include by reference or otherwise the following assurances:
    (i) No household on any Indian reservation shall be permitted to 
participate simultaneously in the Food Stamp Program and the Food 
Distribution Program.
    (ii) The value of the commodities provided to any eligible household 
shall not be considered income or resources for any purposes under any 
Federal, State, or local laws, including, but not limited to, laws 
relating to taxation, welfare, and public assistance programs; and no 
State agency shall decrease any assistance otherwise provided to a 
household because of the receipt of commodities.
    (iii) The distribution of commodities shall not be used as a means 
for furthering the political interest of any individual or party.
    (iv) There shall be no discrimination in the certification of 
applicant households or in the distribution of commodities because of 
sex, race, color, age, political beliefs, religion, handicap or national 
origin.
    (v) Households shall not be required to make any payments in money, 
materials or services for, or in connection with, the receipt of 
commodities; and they shall not be solicited in connection with the 
receipt of commodities for voluntary cash contributions for any purpose.
    (vi) Adequate personnel, including supervisory personnel, to review 
the Food Distribution Program shall be provided to ensure compliance 
with the requirements of this part.
    (vii) Use of disclosure of information obtained from food 
distribution applicant households, exclusively for the Food Distribution 
Program, shall be restricted to persons directly connected with the 
administration or enforcement of the provisions of the Food Distribution 
Programs as defined in part 283 of this subchapter, the Food Stamp Act 
or regulations, or with other Federal or federally aided, means-tested 
assistance programs such as title IV-A (AFDC), XIX (Medicaid), or XVI 
(SSI), or with general assistance programs that are subject to the joint 
processing requirements specified in Sec. 273.2(j)(2).
    (b) Operating manuals. The State agency shall maintain ongoing 
consultation with the ITO in developing the State agency's written 
internal policies, instructions, and forms which are necessary to carry 
out the Food Distribution Program and shall submit them to FCS for 
approval prior to their use. The State agency shall file any comments or 
recommendations offered by the ITO, for review by FCS.
    (c) Staffing. Personnel used in the certification process shall be 
employed in accordance with (1) the current standards for a Merit System 
of Personnel Administration or any standards later prescribed by the 
Office of Personnel Management under section 208 of the 
Intergovernmental Personnel Act of 1970 or (2) when appropriate, the 
ITO's personnel system if it incorporates the basic elements of a merit 
system.
    (d) Bilingual requirements. (1) The State agency shall provide 
bilingual staff, certification forms, including the

[[Page 446]]

application form and certification notices as specified in 
Sec. 283.7(a)(2) and (b)(3), respectively, and any form developed by the 
State agency for reporting changes in household composition and income, 
pursuant to Sec. 283.7(c), and outreach materials, when either an 
estimated 100 or more low income households or the majority of low-
income households on the reservation are a single language minority. 
Single-language minority refers to households which speak the same non-
English language and which do not contain adults(s) fluent in English as 
a second language. If the non-English language is spoken but not 
written, the State agency shall provide bilingual staff, if required, 
but not bilingual material.
    (2) The State agency shall ensure that offices serving reservations 
subject to the criteria in paragraph (d)(1) of this section provide 
sufficient bilingual staff for the timely processing of non-English 
speaking applicants.
    (3) The State agency shall develop estimates of the numbers of low-
income, single-language minority households by using census data 
(including the Census Bureau's Current Population Report: Population 
Estimates and Projections, Series P-25, No. 627) and knowledge of the 
reservation. Local Bureau of Census offices, Community Services 
Administration offices, Community Action agencies, Bureau of Indian 
Affairs, Indian Health Services, planning agencies, the ITO and school 
officials may be important sources of information in determining the 
need for bilingual services.
    (e) Outreach and referral. The State agency shall inform potentially 
eligible households of the availability of the Food Distribution 
Program. The State agency shall develop and distribute printed 
information in the appropriate languages about the Program and 
eligibility requirements. Outreach material shall contain information 
about a household's right to file an application on the same date it 
contacts the certification office. The State agency shall be 
sufficiently familiar with general eligibility requirements for the 
Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants and Children (WIC) or the 
Commodity Supplemental Food Program, if available to reservation 
residents, the Supplemental Security Income Program (SSI), and 
appropriate public and general assistance programs, to identify those 
applicants whose households contain persons who may be eligible for 
these programs, to inform the applicants of their potential eligibility, 
and to provide the applicants with the addresses and telephone numbers 
for these programs. For example, the State agency should provide 
information on the WIC program to applicants whose households contain 
pregnant women, nursing or postpartum women, or children up to the fifth 
birthday.
    (f) Training requirements. The State agency shall institute a 
training program for all personnel who are assigned responsibility for 
the certification of applicant households, for fair hearing officers, 
for field supervisors who review local Food Distribution Programs, for 
those involved in outreach and those responsibile for ordering, storing, 
and distributing commodities.
    (1) State agency training programs shall cover eligibility criteria, 
certification procedures, commodity ordering, storage and distribution 
practices, household rights and responsibilities and other job-related 
responsibilities. The content of the training material shall be reviewed 
and revised periodically to correct deficiencies in program operations 
or reflect changes in policy and procedures.
    (2) The State agency shall allow public attendance at formal 
certification training sessions in accordance with Sec. 274.2(e)(1)(iv).
    (3) FCS shall review the effectiveness of State agency training 
based on information obtained from field reviews, administrative 
analyses and other sources.
    (g) Nutrition education. The State agency shall publicize how 
commodities may be used to contribute to a nutritious diet and how 
commodities may be properly stored by means of visual displays, and 
printed material. The State agency shall encourage appropriate 
organizations, county extension home economists, expanded Food and 
Nutrition Program aides, and qualified volunteers to provide food and 
nutrition information, menus, or cooking

[[Page 447]]

demonstrations, as appropriate for participating households. The State 
agency shall encourage the dissemination of food and nutrition 
information designed to improve the nutrition of households on 
reservations.
    (h) Records and reports. The State agency shall keep records and 
submit reports and other information as required by FCS. Records 
required under this part shall be retained for a period of three years 
from the date of the submission of the annual financial status report, 
SF-269; except that, if any litigation, claim or audit is started before 
the expiration of the three year period, the records shall be retained 
until all litigation, claims or audit findings involving the records 
have been resolved.
    (i) Monitoring. In accordance with its responsibility for efficient 
and effective program administration the State agency shall monitor and 
review its operations under this part to ensure compliance with the 
provisions of this part and with any applicable instructions of FCS.
    (1) The State agency shall review program operations at least 
annually, document program deficiencies and establish and implement 
specific plans of corrective action for deficiencies noted.
    (2) Reviews of operations shall include, but not be limited to, 
certification of households, determination of food preferences, 
distribution of commodities, fair hearing procedures, commodity 
inventories and timeliness and accuracy of reports to FCS.
    (3) Program reviews and corrective action plans shall be available 
to FCS upon request.
    (j) Investigations and complaints. The State agency shall promptly 
investigate complaints received of irregularities in the handling, 
distribution, receipt or use of commodities, other than use of 
commodities by eligible households in the preparation of meals for home 
consumption, and shall take appropriate action to correct any 
irregularities. The State agency shall also promptly investigate 
complaints of irregularities relating to certification procedures or the 
delivery of services and shall take appropriate action to correct any 
irregularities or noncompliance with provisions relating to 
certification procedures, provision of services or household rights. The 
State agency shall document each investigation and action in sufficient 
detail to allow for FCS review of all State agency actions and 
information. The Department shall make investigations at the request of 
the State agency and ITO or when the Department determines an 
investigation is necessary.
    (k) Sanctions. If the State agency fails to comply with the 
provisions of this part or its plan of operation, FCS may:
    (1) Take action against any State agency under Sec. 283.9(g) of this 
part with respect to administrative funds available from FCS for use by 
the State agency or (2) disqualify the State agency from further 
distribution of commodities to households. Disqualification of the State 
agency shall not prevent FCS or the Department from taking other 
actions, including prosecution under applicable Federal statutes, when 
deemed necessary. Reinstatement shall be contingent upon approval by FCS 
of the State agency's plan for corrective action or determination by FCS 
that the State agency has complied with any other requirements for 
reinstatement which FCS may set forth. These provisions apply to all 
State agencies, regardless of whether the Program is administered by an 
agency of the State government or an ITO. If the ITO is disqualified as 
a State agency, an appropriate agency of State government shall 
administer the Food Distribution Program on the reservation. If an 
agency of State government is disqualified as the State agency for the 
Food Distribution Program on the reservation, the ITO may request in 
writing a capability determination for program administration in 
accordance with Sec. 283.4.
    (l) Appeals. (1) The agency of the State government or an ITO may 
appeal an initial determination by FCS on:
    (i) Whether or not the reservation definition is met;
    (ii) The capability of an ITO to administer the Food Distribution 
Program;
    (iii) Sanctions taken under Sec. 283.5(k) or Sec. 283.9(g); or

[[Page 448]]

    (iv) The Federal matching percentage level of administrative funding 
made available by FCS.
    (2) At the time FCS advises the State agency or ITO of its 
determination, FCS shall also advise the State agency or ITO of its 
right to appeal and, except for appeals of funding determinations, shall 
advise the State agency or ITO of its right to request either a meeting 
to present its position in person or a review of the record. On appeals 
of funding determinations, FCS shall advise the State agency or ITO that 
it may indicate if it wishes a meeting, however, FCS need schedule a 
meeting only if FCS determines a meeting is warranted to reach a proper 
adjudication of the matter. Otherwise, FCS shall review supportive 
information submitted by the State agency or ITO in paragraph (l)(3)(ii) 
of this section.
    (3) Procedure--(i) Time limit. Any State agency or ITO that wants to 
appeal an initial FCS determination under paragraph (l) of this section 
must notify the Administrator of FCS, in writing, within 15 days from 
the date of the determination. If the appeal concerns either paragraph 
(l)(1) (i) or (ii) of this section, the implementation timeframes as 
specified in Sec. 283.4(d)(2) and the timeframe for determining an ITO's 
capability as specified in Sec. 283.5 are suspended from the date the 
appeal is requested to the date of the final determination.
    (ii) Acknowledgment. Within five days of receipt by the 
Administrator, of FCS, of a request for review, FCS shall provide the 
State agency or ITO with a written acknowledgment of the request by 
certified mail, return receipt requested. The acknowledgment shall 
include the name and address of the official designated by the 
Administrator, FCS, to review the appeal. The acknowledgment shall also 
notify the State agency or ITO that within ten days of receipt of the 
acknowledgment, the State agency or ITO shall submit written information 
in support of its position.
    (4) Scheduling a meeting. If the Administrator, FCS, grants a 
meeting FCS shall advise the State agency or ITO of the time, date and 
location of the meeting by certified mail, return receipt requested at 
least ten days in advance of the meeting. FCS shall schedule and conduct 
the meeting and make a decision within 60 days of the receipt of the 
information submitted in response to paragraph (l)(3)(ii) of this 
section.
    (5) Review. If no meeting is conducted the official designated by 
the Administrator, FCS, shall review information presented by a State 
agency or ITO which requests a review and shall make a final 
determination in writing within 45 days of the receipt of the State 
agency's or ITO's information submitted in response to paragraph 
(l)(3)(ii) of this section setting forth in full the reasons for the 
determination.
    (6) Final decision. The official's decision after a meeting or a 
review shall be final.
    (m) Implementation. The State agency shall implement changes 
required by amendments to these regulations in accordance with schedules 
specified in the amendment.
    (1) Amendment 2. (i) If an ITO currently participates in, but does 
not administer, the Food Distribution Program on Indian Reservations:
    (A) FCS shall determine tribal eligibility and capability to 
administer the Food Distribution Program on Indian Reservations within 
60 days of receipt of a completed application. If an incomplete 
application is received, FCS shall within 15 days, notify the ITO of 
what additional information is required. The processing time for the 
capability determination shall start from the date the additional 
information is received by FCS.
    (B) Upon FCS' determination that the ITO will administer the Food 
Distribution Program on Indian Reservations, FCS shall expeditiously 
plan for and provide needed training and technical assistance to 
facilitate timely commencement of tribal administrative 
responsibilities. The ITO shall have 120 days from FCS' determination in 
paragraph (m)(1)(i)(A) of this section to submit and have approved a 
plan of operation, operating manuals, and to commence program operations 
under the regulations as specified in this part. Extensions may be 
granted by FCS to ITOs if good cause is shown.

[[Page 449]]

    (C) If FCS determines that an ITO is not capable of administering 
the Food Distribution Program on Indian Reservations, FCS shall direct 
the State to continue program operations and submit a new plan of 
operation and to commence program operations under the regulations as 
specified in this part within 120 days from FCS' determination in 
paragraph (m)(1)(i)(A) of this section.
    (ii) If an ITO currently administers the Food Distribution Program 
on Indian Reservations, the timeframes specified in paragraph (m)(1)(i) 
of this section apply except that:
    (A) FCS shall determine tribal eligibility and capability to 
administer the Food Distribution Program on Indian Reservations within 
30 days of receipt of a completed application.
    (B) If FCS determines that the ITO will not administer the Food 
Distribution Program on Indian Reservations, FCS shall direct the ITO to 
continue program operations until the State government can commence 
program operations. The State government shall have 120 days from FCS' 
determination in paragraph (m)(1)(i)(A) of this section to submit and 
have approved a plan of operation and to commence program operations 
under the regulations as specified in this part.
    (iii) If an ITO does not currently participate in a Food 
Distribution Program on Indian Reservations, the timeframes in paragraph 
(m)(1)(i) of this section apply except that if FCS determines that an 
ITO cannot administer the program, FCS shall direct the State to submit 
a plan of operation and to commence program operations under the 
regulations as specified in this part within 180 days from the 
determination.
    (iv) Extensions to the above implementation timeframe (except for 
those timeframes set forth in paragraphs (m)(1) (i)(A) and (ii)(A) of 
this section) may be granted by FCS to ITOs or State government agencies 
if there is compelling justification involving circumstances which were 
not reasonably foreseeable and which are not the fault of the ITO or the 
State agency and which circumstances present extraordinary problems that 
would render earlier implementation impossible.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
0584-0071)

(44 U.S.C. 3506; E.O. 12372, July 14, 1982, 47 FR 30959, sec. 401(b) of 
the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act of 1968, 31 U.S.C. 6506(c))

[44 FR 35928, June 19, 1979, as amended at 47 FR 746, Jan. 7, 1982. 
Redesignated and amended by Amdt. 1, 47 FR 14137, Apr, 2, 1982; Amdt. 2, 
47 FR 19665, May 7, 1982; 48 FR 29123, June 24, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 253.6  Eligibility of households.

    (a) Household concept. (1) The State agency shall determine 
eligibility for the Food Distribution Program on a household basis. 
Household means any of the following individuals or groups of 
individuals, provided that such individuals or groups are not boarders 
or residents of an institution and provided that separate household or 
boarder status shall not be granted to a spouse of a member of the 
household, or to children under 18 years of age under the parental 
control of a member of the household.
    (i) An individual living alone.
    (ii) An individual living with others, but customarily purchasing 
food and preparing meals for home consumption separate and apart from 
the others.
    (iii) A group of individuals living together for whom food is 
customarily purchased in common and for whom meals are prepared together 
for home consumption.
    (2) Nonhousehold members. The following individuals residing with a 
household shall not be considered household members in determining the 
household's eligibility. Nonhousehold members specified in paragraphs 
(a)(2) (i) and (v) who are otherwise eligible may participate in the 
Program as separate households.
    (i) Roomers. Individuals to whom a household furnishes lodging, but 
not meals, for compensation.
    (ii) SSI recipients in ``cash-out'' States. Recipients of SSI 
benefits who reside in a State designated by the Secretary of Health, 
Education, and Welfare to have specifically included the value of the 
coupon allotment in its State supplemental payments. These persons are 
not eligible for Food Distribution Program benefits.

[[Page 450]]

    (iii) Disqualified individuals. Individuals disqualified from the 
Food Stamp Program for fraud, as set forth in Sec. 273.16.
    (iv) Illegal residents. Individuals who are not legal residents of 
the United States. While U.S. citizenship is not required for 
participation in the Food Distribution Program, persons receiving food 
distribution benefits must be lawfully living in the United States.
    (v) Others. Other individuals who share living quarters with the 
household but who do not customarily purchase food and prepare meals 
with the household. For example, if the applicant household shares 
living quarters with another family to save on rent, but does not 
purchase and prepare food together with that family, the members of the 
other family are not members of the applicant household.
    (3) Authorized representatives. The head of the household, spouse, 
or any other responsible member of the household may designate an 
authorized representative to act on behalf of the household in making 
application for commodities and/or obtaining commodities as provided in 
Sec. 283.7(a)(10)(i) and Sec. 283.7(a)(10)(ii) respectively.
    (b) Residency or citizenship. (1) All households residing on a 
reservation on which the FDPIR operates shall be eligible to apply for 
program benefits on that reservation regardless of whether they include 
an Indian member. All Indian tribal households as defined in 
Sec. 253.2(c) of this part which reside in near areas established under 
Sec. 253.4(d) of this part shall be eligible to apply for program 
benefits. The ITO or State agency shall serve all income-eligible 
applicant households residing on reservations who apply for benefits, 
and all income-eligible applicant Indian tribal households residing in 
near areas. The ITO or State agency administering the program in a near 
area shall, for purposes of determining program eligibility, accept 
documentation from a household member's tribe of origin as proof of 
tribal membership. Residency shall not mean domicile nor shall the State 
agency impose any durational residency requirement. However, persons on 
the reservation solely for vacations shall not be considered residents. 
No household may participate in the Food Stamp Program or in the Food 
Distribution Program in more than one geographical area at the same 
time.
    (2) No person shall participate in the Food Distribution Program on 
an Indian reservation unless the person is legally a resident of the 
United States. A further discussion of ``legal residency'' is provided 
in Sec. 283.6(a)(3)(iv).
    (c) Income and resource eligibility standards of public assistance, 
supplemental security income, and certain general assistance households. 
(1) Households in which all members are included in a federally aided 
public assistance or supplemental security income grant, except as 
provided for in Sec. 283.6(a)(2)(ii), shall, if otherwise eligible under 
this part, be determined to be eligible to participate in the Food 
Distribution Program while receiving such grants without regard to the 
income and resources of the household members.
    (2) If FCS determines that a State or local general assistance 
program applies criteria of need the same as or similar to, those 
applied under any of the federally aided public assistance programs, 
households in which all members are included in such a general 
assistance grant, shall, if otherwise eligible under this part, be 
determined to be eligible to participate in the Food Distribution 
Program while receiving such grants without regard to the income and 
resources of household members.
    (d) Resource eligibility standards--(1) Uniform household standards 
for nonassistance households. The State agency shall apply uniform 
national resource standards of eligibility to all applicant households, 
except those in which all members are recipients of federally aided 
public assistance, supplemental security income, or certain general 
assistance program benefits as provided in paragraph (c)(2) of this 
section. The maximum allowable resources shall not exceed $1,750 for the 
household; except that, for households of two or more members which 
include a member or members age 60 or over, such resources shall not 
exceed $3,000.
    (2) Resources. In determining the resources of a household, only 
cash on

[[Page 451]]

hand, money in checking or savings accounts, savings certificates, 
stocks, or bonds, or other readily negotiable and accessible 
certificates or instruments shall be counted; except that the following 
resources shall be entirely excluded:
    (i) The cash value of life insurance policies and pension funds, 
including funds in pension plans with interest penalties for early 
withdrawals, such as a Keogh plan or an Individual Retirement Account 
(IRA), as long as the funds remain in the pension plans.
    (ii) Any governmental payments which are designated for the 
restoration of a home damaged in a disaster, if the household is subject 
to a legal sanction if the funds are not used as intended, for example 
payments made by the Department of Housing and Urban Development through 
the individual and family grant program of disaster loans or grants made 
by the Small Business Administration.
    (iii) Resources, such as those of students or self-employed persons, 
which have been prorated as income. The treatment of self-employment 
income is explained in Sec. 283.7(b)(1)(iii).
    (iv) Resources which are excluded by express provision of Federal 
statute. The following is the current listing of resources excluded by 
Federal statute:
    (A) Payment received under the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act 
(Pub. L. 92-203, section 21(a) or the Sac and Fox Indian claims 
agreement Pub. L. 94-189);
    (B) Payments received by certain Indian tribal members under Pub. L. 
94-114, section 6, regarding submarginal land held in trust by the 
United States;
    (C) Payments received by certain Indian tribal members under Pub. L. 
94-540 regarding the Grand River Bank of Ottawa Indians;
    (D) Reimbursements from the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real 
Property Acquistion Policy Act of 1970 (Pub. L. 91-646, section 216);
    (E) Earned income tax credits received before January 1, 1980, as a 
result of Pub. L. 95-600, the Revenue Act of 1978.
    (F) Payments received from the youth incentive entitlement pilot 
projects, the youth community conservation and improvement projects and 
the youth employment and training programs under title IV of the 
Comprehensive Employment and Training Act Amendments of 1978 (Pub. L. 
95-524).
    (3) Jointly owned resources. Resources owned jointly by separate 
households shall be prorated between or among those households unless 
the applicant can demonstrate that such resources are inaccessible to it 
because access to the value of the resource is dependent upon the 
agreement of a joint owner who refuses to comply.
    (4) Resources of disqualified members. Resources of individuals 
disqualified from participation in the Food Stamp Program for fraud 
shall continue to count in their entirety to the remaining household 
members when determining the household's eligibility for the Food 
Distribution Program.
    (e) Income--(1) Income eligibility standards for nonassistance 
households. (i) The State agency shall apply uniform national income 
eligibility standards for the Food Distribution Program except for 
households in which all members are recipients of public assistance, 
supplemental security income except as provided for in 
Sec. 283.6(a)(2)(ii) or certain general assistance program payments as 
provided in Sec. 283.6(c). The income eligibility standards shall be the 
monthly income eligibility standards for the Food Stamp Program in the 
State, increased by the amount of the standard deduction for that State, 
as published in the appendix to Sec. 273.9.
    (ii) The income eligibility standards for the Food Distribution 
Program shall be adjusted each January 1 and July 1, as necessary, to 
reflect changes in the Food Stamp Program income eligibility limits and 
standard deductions.
    (2) Definition of income. Household income shall mean all income 
from whatever source, excluding only items specified in paragraph (e)(3) 
of this section.
    (i) Earned income shall include:
    (A) All wages and salaries of an employee.
    (B) The total gross income from a self-employment enterprise, 
including the net profit from the sale of any capital goods or equipment 
related to the business. Ownership of rental property shall be 
considered a self-employment

[[Page 452]]

enterprise. Payments from a roomer and returns on rental property shall 
be considered self-employment income.
    (C) Training allowances from vocational and rehabilitative programs 
recognized by Federal, State or local governments, such as the Work 
Incentive Program, and programs authorized by the Comprehensive 
Employment and Training Act, to the extent they are not a reimbursement.
    (ii) Unearned income shall include, but not be limited to:
    (A) Assistance payments from Federal or Federally aided public 
assistance programs, such as Supplemental Security Income (SSI) or Aid 
to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC), General Assistance (GA) 
programs, or other assistance programs based on need.
    (B) Annuities; pensions; retirement; veteran's or disability 
benefits; worker's or unemployment compensation; old-age, survivors, or 
social security benefits; strike benefits; foster care payments for 
children or adults.
    (C) Support or alimony payments made directly to the household from 
nonhousehold members.
    (D) Scholarships, education grants, fellowships, deferred payment 
loans for education, veteran's education benefit and the like in excess 
of amounts excluded under paragraph (e)(3)(iii) of this section.
    (E) Payments from Government-sponsored programs, dividends, 
interest, royalties, and all other direct money payments from any source 
which can be construed to be a gain or benefit.
    (F) The earned or unearned income of an individual disqualified from 
participation in the Food Stamp Program for fraud shall continue to be 
counted as income, less the pro rata share for the disqualified member. 
Procedures for calculating this pro rata share are described in 
Sec. 283.7.
    (iii) Income shall not include the following:
    (A) Monies withheld from an assistance payment, earned income or 
other income source, or monies received from any income source which are 
voluntarily or involuntarily returned to repay a prior overpayment 
received from that income source.
    (B) Child support payments received by AFDC recipients which must be 
transferred to the agency administering title IV-D of the Social 
Security Act of 1935, as amended, to maintain AFDC eligibility.
    (3) Income exclusions. Only the following items shall be excluded 
from household income and no other income shall be disregarded:
    (i) Any gain or benefit which is not in the form of money payable 
directly to the household, including:
    (A) In-kind income. Nonmonetary or in-kind benefits, such as meals, 
clothing, public housing, or produce from a garden.
    (B) Vendor payments. A payment made in money on behalf of a 
household shall be considered a vendor payment whenever a person or 
organization outside of the household uses its own funds to make a 
direct payment to either the household's creditors or a person or 
organization providing a service to the household. For example, if a 
relative, who is not a household member, pays out of its own resources 
the household's rent directly to the landlord, the payment is considered 
a vendor payment and is not counted as income to the household. Also, 
payments specified by a court order or other written support or alimony 
agreement to go directly to a third party rather than the household and 
support payments which are paid to a third party are excluded as vendor 
payments. Wages garnished or diverted by employers, or money deducted or 
otherwise diverted from a household's public assistance grant by a State 
for purposes such as managing the household's expenses, shall not be 
considered a vendor payment, since the person or organization making the 
payment is using money payable to the household rather than its own 
funds.
    (ii) Any income in the certification period which is received too 
infrequently or irregularly to be reasonably anticipated, but not in 
excess of $30 in a quarter.
    (iii) Education loans on which payment is deferred, grants 
scholarships, fellowships, veterans' educational benefits, and the like 
to the extent that they are used for tuition and mandatory school fees. 
Mandatory fees are

[[Page 453]]

those charged to all students or those charged to all students within a 
certain curriculum. For example, uniforms, lab fees, or equipment 
charged to all students to enroll in a chemistry course would be 
excluded. However, transportation, supplies, and textbook expenses are 
not uniformly charged to all students and, therefore, would not be 
excluded as mandatory fees.
    (iv) All loans, including loans from private individuals as well as 
commercial institutions, other than education loans on which repayment 
is deferred.
    (v) Reimbursements for past or future expenses to the extent they do 
not exceed actual expenses. For example, reimbursements of flat 
allowances for job or training related expenses such as travel per diem, 
uniforms, and transportation to and from the job or training site are 
excluded as income.
    (vi) Monies received and used for care and maintenance of a third 
party beneficiary who is not a household member.
    (vii) The earned income (as defined in paragraph (e)(2)(i) of this 
section) of children who are members of the household, who are students 
at least half time and who have not attained their eighteenth birthday. 
The exclusion shall continue to apply during temporary interruptions in 
school attendance due to semester or vaction breaks, provided the 
child's enrollment will resume following the break. Individuals are 
considered children for purposes of this provision if they are under the 
parental control of another household member.
    (viii) Money received in the form of a nonrecurring lump sum 
payment, including but not limited to, income tax refunds, rebates, or 
credits; retroactive lump-sum social security, SSI, public assistance, 
railroad retirement benefits or other payments, or retroactive lump-sum 
insurance settlements; refunds of security deposits on rental properties 
or utilities or lump-sum payments arising from land interests held in 
trust for, or by, a tribe. These payments shall be counted as resources 
in the month received unless specifically excluded from consideration as 
a resource by other Federal law.
    (ix) The cost of producing self-employment income. The procedures 
for computing the cost of producing self-employment income are described 
in Sec. 283.7(b)(1)(iii).
    (x) Any income that is specifically excluded by any other Federal 
statute from consideration as income. The following Federal statutes 
provide such an exclusion.
    (A) Reimbursements from the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real 
Property Acquisition Policy Act of 1970 (Pub. L. 91-646, section 216).
    (B) Payments received under the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act 
(Pub. L. 92-203, section 21(a)).
    (C) Any payment to volunteers under Title II (RSVP, foster 
grandparents, and others) and title III (SCORE and ACE) of the Domestic 
Volunteer Services Act of 1973 (Pub. L. 93-113), as amended. Payments 
under title I (VISTA) to volunteers shall be excluded for those 
individuals receiving federally donated commodities, food stamps, or 
public assistance at the time they joined the title I program, except 
that households which are receiving an income exclusion for a VISTA or 
other title I subsistence allowance at the time of implementation of 
these rules shall continue to receive an income exclusion for VISTA for 
the length of their volunteer contract in effect at the time of 
implementation of these rules. Temporary interruptions in food 
distribution shall not alter the exclusion once an initial determination 
has been made. New applicants who are not receiving federally donated 
commodities, food stamps or public assistance at the time they joined 
VISTA shall have these volunteer payments included as earned income.
    (D) Income derived from certain submarginal land of the United 
States which is held in trust for certain Indian tribes (Pub. L. 94-114, 
section 6).
    (E) Payments received by certain Indian tribal members under Pub. L. 
94-540 regarding the Grand River Band of Ottawa Indians.
    (F) Payments from the Crisis Intervention Program (CIP) administered 
by the Community Services Administration (CSA).
    (G) Payments received from the youth incentive entitlement pilot 
projects, the youth community conservation and improvement projects

[[Page 454]]

and the youth employment and training programs under title IV of the 
Comprehensive Employment and Training Act Amendments of 1978 (Pub. L. 
95-524).
    (f) Income deductions. (1) Households with earned income, as defined 
in paragraph (e)(2)(i) of this section, shall be allowed a deduction of 
twenty percent of their earned income. Earned income excluded under 
paragraph (e)(3) of this section shall not be considered earned income 
for the purpose of computing this deduction.
    (2) Households shall also receive a deduction for the actual costs 
for the care of a child or other dependent when necessary for a 
household member to accept or continue employment or attend training or 
pursue education which is preparatory to employment. This deduction 
shall not exceed the maximum allowable deduction for dependent care 
costs allowable under the Food Stamp Program in the 48 States and the 
District of Columbia.

[44 FR 35928, June 19, 1979. Redesignated by Amdt. 1, 47 FR 14137, Apr. 
2, 1982, and amended at 59 FR 1449, Jan. 11, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 253.7  Certification of households.

    (a) Application processing--(1) General purpose. The application 
process includes filing and completing an application form, being 
interviewed, and having certain information verified. The State agency 
shall act promptly on all applications. Expedited service shall be 
available to household in immediate need. When the State agency is other 
than the ITO, the ITO, when appropriate, may receive copies of 
certification and/or termination notices to the extent requested or 
agreed upon by the household. State agencies and ITOs may develop 
formalized mechanisms to ensure ITO receipt of notices.
    (2) Food Distribution Program application form. The State agency 
shall use an application form acceptable to FCS. The State agency shall 
consult with the ITO in developing the application form. The State 
agency shall make application forms readily accessible to potentially 
eligible households and those groups or organizations involved in 
outreach efforts. The State agency shall also provide an application 
form to anyone who requests the form. State agencies which elect joint 
PA or GA/Food Distribution Program procedures shall follow the 
requirements of Sec. 283.7(f) for the application form. State agencies 
may also use an abbreviated recertification form.
    (3) Filing an application. Households must file an application for 
the Food Distribution Program by submitting the form to a certification 
office in person, through an authorized representative or by mail. The 
State agency shall document the date the application was received. Each 
household has the right to file an application form the same day it 
contacts the certification office during office hours on the reservation 
where the household resides. The household shall be advised that it does 
not have to be interviewed before filing the application and may file an 
incomplete application form as long as the application contains the 
applicant's name and address and is signed by a responsible member of 
the household or the household's authorized representative.
    (4) Household cooperation. To determine eligibility, the application 
form must be completed and signed, the household or its authorized 
representative must be interviewed, and certain information on the 
application must be verified. If the household refuses to cooperate with 
the State agency in completing this process, the application shall be 
denied upon a determination of refusal. For a determination of refusal 
to be made, the household must be able to cooperate, but clearly 
demonstrate that it will not take actions that it can take and that are 
required to complete the application process. For example, to be denied 
for refusal to cooperate, a household must refuse to be interviewed and 
not merely fail to appear for the interview. If there is any question as 
to whether the household has merely failed to cooperate, as opposed to 
refused to cooperate, the household shall not be denied solely for this 
reason. The household shall also be determined ineligible if it refuses 
to cooperate in any subsequent review of its eligibility. Once denied or 
terminated for refusal to cooperate, the household may reapply but shall 
not be determined eligible until it cooperates.

[[Page 455]]

    (5) Interviews. All applicant households, including those submitting 
applications by mail, shall have an interview with a qualified 
eligibility worker prior to initial certification and all 
recertifications. At State agency discretion, applicants may be 
interviewed by telephone or in the home. No household shall be 
interviewed by telephone for any two consecutive certifications without 
a face-to-face interview. State agencies must attempt to schedule home 
visits in advance. Home visits cannot extend required processing 
standards set forth in Sec. 283.7(a)(7) or Sec. 283.7(a)(9). The 
individual interviewed may be the head of household, spouse, any other 
responsible member of the household or an authorized representative. The 
household, if it wishes, may be accompanied to the interview by anyone 
of its choice. The interviewer shall not only review the information 
that appears on the application, but shall explore and resolve with the 
household unclear and incomplete information. Households shall be 
advised of their rights and responsibilities during the interview. The 
interview shall be conducted as an official and confidential discussion 
of household circumstances. The applicant's right to privacy shall be 
protected during the interview. Facilities shall be adequate to preserve 
the privacy and confidentiality of the interview.
    (6) Verification. Verification is the use of third party information 
or documentation to establish the accuracy of statements on the 
application in order to determine eligibility or ineligibility of the 
household.
    (i) Mandatory verification. Gross nonexempt income shall be verified 
for all households prior to certification. Income verification need not 
be to the exact dollar amount unless the household's eligibility would 
be affected since benefits are not reduced as income rises in the Food 
Distribution Program. However, where all attempts to verify the income 
have been unsuccessful either because the person or organization 
providing the income has failed to cooperate with the household and the 
State agency or because the other sources of verification are 
unavailable, the eligibility worker shall determine an amount to be used 
for certification purposes based on the best available information.
    (ii) Verification of questionable information. Eligibility criteria 
other than income, including residency on or near the reservation, shall 
be verified prior to certification only if they are questionable. To be 
considered questionable, the information on the application must be 
inconsistent with statements by the applicant, inconsistent with other 
information on the application or previous applications, or inconsistent 
with other information received by the State agency. However, due to the 
difficulty in verifying whether a group of individuals is a household, 
State agencies shall generally accept the household's statement 
regarding food preparation and consumption.
    (iii) Responsibility for obtaining verification. The household has 
primary responsibility for providing documentary evidence or an 
acceptable collateral contact to support its income statements and to 
resolve any questionable information. However, the State agency shall 
assist the household in obtaining the needed verification. The State 
agency shall accept any reasonable documentary evidence provided by the 
household and shall be primarily concerned with how adequately the 
verification proves the statements on the application. The State agency 
shall also accept verification from collateral contacts so long as the 
collateral contacts can provide accurate third party verification. The 
State agency shall rely on the household to provide the name of the 
collateral contact. The State agency is not required to use a collateral 
contact designated by the household if the collateral contact cannot be 
expected to provide accurate third party verification. If the collateral 
contact designated by the household is unacceptable to the State agency, 
the State agency shall ask the household to designate another collateral 
contact, and the State agency shall document the casefile as to the 
reason the collateral contact was rejected and an alternate was 
requested. The State agency shall use collateral contacts, rather than 
documentary evidence, for verification if such verification is 
acceptable, and would result in

[[Page 456]]

better service to the household. For example, the household may be able 
to obtain a wage stub from the employer, but the State agency could call 
the employer the same day to provide the verification of income. Home 
visits shall be used as verification only if documentary evidence and 
collateral contacts cannot be obtained, and the State agency attempts to 
schedule the visit in advance with the household.
    (iv) Documentation. Casefiles must be documented to support a 
determination of eligibility or denial. Documentation shall be in 
sufficient detail to permit a reviewer to determine the reasonableness 
and accuracy of the determination.
    (v) Verification for recertification. At recertification, the State 
agency shall verify a change in income if the source has changed or the 
amount has changed by more than $50 per month since the last time the 
income was verified. State agencies may verify income which is unchanged 
or has changed by $50 per month or less, provided verification is, at a 
minimum, required when information is questionable as defined in 
paragraph (a)(6)(ii) of this section. All other changes reported at the 
time of recertification shall be subject to the same verification 
procedures as apply at initial certification. Unchanged information, 
other than income, shall not be verified at recertification unless the 
information is questionable as defined in paragraph (a)(6)(ii) of this 
section.
    (7) Processing standards. The State agency shall provide eligible 
households that complete the initial application process an opportunity 
to participate as soon as possible, but not later than seven calendar 
days excluding weekends and holidays after the application was filed. An 
application is filed the day the State agency receives an application 
containing the applicant's name and address and which is signed by 
either a responsible member of the household or the household's 
authorized representative.
    (8) Delays in processing. If the State agency cannot determine a 
household's eligibility within seven calendar days excluding weekends 
and holidays of the date the application was filed due to lack of 
verification as required in paragraph (a)(6) of this section, the State 
agency shall authorize the distribution of commodities to the household 
for one month pending verification. In order to certify the household 
pending verification, the information on the application form must be 
complete and indicate that the household will likely be eligible. No 
further distribution of commodities shall be made without completing the 
eligibility determination.
    (9) Expedited service. The State agency shall provide an opportunity 
to obtain commodities within one calendar day excluding weekends and 
holidays after the date the application was filed for those households 
with no income in the current month and also for those households which, 
in the judgment of the certifying agency, would likely be eligible and 
would otherwise suffer a hardship. The basis for this determination 
shall be recorded in the casefile. State agencies shall provide same day 
service, if possible, to households eligible for expedited service which 
would likely suffer a hardship if required to return to the office the 
next day. Warehouses or other distribution points need not be open 
during all certification hours to meet this need. However, accessibility 
to federally donated commodities by appropriate certification or other 
personnel should be established for households in immediate need. When 
State agencies can demonstrate a need, FCS may approve other expedited 
timeframes based on circumstances such as distance to warehouses or 
other distribution points. To expedite the certification of households 
in immediate need the State agency shall postpone the verification 
required under paragraph (a)(6) of this section. However, the State 
agency shall verify the household's identity and address through a 
collateral contact or readily available documentary evidence. If 
possible, the household's income statements should be verified at the 
same time. The State agency shall complete the verification for 
households certified on an expedited basis prior to the distribution of 
commodities to the household for any subsequent month.
    (10) Authorized representatives. The head of the household, spouse, 
or any

[[Page 457]]

other responsible member of the household may designate an authorized 
representative to act on behalf of the household in one or all of the 
following capacities:
    (i) Making application for commodities. When the head of the 
household or the spouse cannot make application, another household 
member may apply or an adult nonhousehold member may be designated in 
writing as the authorized representative for that purpose. The head of 
the household or the spouse should prepare or review the application 
whenever possible, even though another household member or the 
authorized representative will actually be interviewed. Adults who are 
nonhousehold members may be designated as authorized representatives for 
certification purposes only if they are sufficiently aware of relevant 
household circumstances.
    (ii) Obtaining commodities. An authorized representative of the 
household may be designated to obtain commodities. Designation shall be 
made at the time the application is completed except that the household 
may be permitted to designate an emergency authorized representative in 
the event that illness or other unforeseen circumstances prevent the 
household from otherwise obtaining commodities. Designation of an 
emergency authorized representative must be made in writing by a 
responsible member of the household. State agencies may distribute 
commodities to household members or authorized representatives 
presenting an identification card or other appropriate identification 
that satisfactorily identifies the member obtaining commodities.
    (b) Eligibility determinations--(1) Determining income. (i) The 
State agency shall take into account the income already received by the 
household during the certification period and any anticipated income the 
household and the State agency are reasonably certain will be received 
during the remainder of the certification period. If the amount of 
income that is anticipated is uncertain, that portion of the household's 
income that is uncertain shall not be counted by the State agency. For 
example, a household anticipating income from a new source, such as a 
new job or recently applied for public assistance benefits, may be 
uncertain as to the timing and amount of the initial payment. These 
monies shall not be anticipated by the State agency unless there is 
reasonable certainty concerning the month in which the payment will be 
received and in what amount. If the exact amount of the income is not 
known, that portion of it which can be anticipated with reasonable 
certainty shall be considered as income. In cases where the receipt of 
income is reasonably certain but the monthly amount may fluctuate, and 
the household's income is close to the income eligibility limit the 
State agency may elect to average income provided that such averaging 
does not disadvantage the household. Such averaging shall be based on 
income that is anticipated to be available to the household during the 
certification period. The State agency shall use income received in the 
past 30 days as an indicator of future income during the certification 
period unless changes in income have occurred or can be anticipated.
    (ii) Income anticipated during the certification period shall be 
counted as income only in the month it is expected to be received, 
unless the income is averaged.
    (iii)(A) Self-employment income which represents a household's 
annual support including the net profit from the sale of any capital 
goods or equipment related to the business shall be annualized over a 
12-month period, even if the income is received in only a short period 
of time. For example, self-employment income received by farmers shall 
be averaged over a 12-month period if the income represents the farmer's 
annual support.
    (B) Self-employment income which represents only a part of a 
household's annual support, including the net profit from the sale of 
any capital goods or equipment related to the business, shall be 
averaged over the period of time the income is intended to cover. For 
example, self-employed vendors who work only in the summer and 
supplement their income from other sources during the balance of the 
year shall have their self-employment income averaged over the summer 
months rather than a 12-month period.

[[Page 458]]

    (C) For the period of time over which self-employment income is 
determined, the State agency shall add all gross self-employment income, 
exclude the cost of producing the self-employment income and divide the 
net self-employment income by the number of months over which the income 
will be averaged. The allowable costs of producing self-employment 
income include but are not limited to, the identifiable costs of labor, 
stock, raw materials, seed and fertilizer, interest paid to purchase 
income producing property, insurance premiums, and taxes paid on income 
producing property.
    (D) In determining net self-employment income, payments on the 
principal of the purchase price of income-producing real estate and 
capital assets, equipment, machinery, and other durable goods, net 
losses from previous periods, Federal, State, and local income taxes, 
money set aside for retirement purposes, and other work-related personal 
expenses (such as transportation to and from work) will not be allowable 
costs of doing business.
    (iv) The monthly net self-employment income shall be added to any 
other earned income received by the household. The total monthly earned 
income, less the 20 percent earned income deduction, shall then be added 
to all monthly unearned income received by the household.
    (v) Allowable costs for dependent care shall be subtracted from the 
household's total monthly income to determine net monthly income.
    (vi) The total net monthly income shall be compared to the income 
eligibility standard for the appropriate household size to determine the 
household's eligibility.
    (2) Certification periods. (i) The State agency shall establish 
definite periods of time within which households shall be eligible to 
receive benefits. Further eligibility shall be established upon a 
recertification based upon a newly completed application, an interview, 
and such verification as required by paragraph (a)(6)(v) of this 
section.
    (ii) Certification periods shall conform to calendar months. The 
first month in the certification period of initial applicants shall be 
the month in which eligibility is determined. For example, if a 
household submits an application in late January and the household is 
determined eligible on the fifth working day which falls in February, a 
six-month certification period would include February through July. Upon 
recertification, the certification period will begin with the month 
following the last month of the previous certification period.
    (iii) A household shall be assigned a certification period for as 
long a period as the household's circumstances are expected to remain 
sufficiently stable such that the household is expected to continue to 
meet the program's eligibility standards. In no event shall a 
certification period exceed one year.
    (3) Certification notices--(i) Notice of eligibility. If an 
application is approved, the State agency shall provide the household a 
written notice of eligibility and the beginning and ending dates of the 
certification period. Households certified on an expedited basis shall 
be advised that the subsequent month's eligibility will depend upon 
completion of the postponed verification.
    (ii) Notice of denial. If the application is denied, the State 
agency shall provide the household written notice explaining the basis 
for the denial, the household's right to request a fair hearing, and the 
telephone number and address of the person to contact for additional 
information. If there is an individual or organization available which 
provides free legal representation, the notice shall also advise the 
household of the availability of the service.
    (iii) Notice of adverse action. (A) Prior to any action to reduce or 
terminate a household's benefits within the certification period, except 
for households voluntarily switching program participation from the Food 
Distribution Program to the Food Stamp Program, State agencies shall 
provide the household timely and adequate advance notice before the 
adverse action is taken.
    (B) In State agencies that have elected joint public assistance or 
general assistance and Food Distribution processing, the notice of 
adverse action shall be considered timely if the advance notice period 
conforms to that period of time defined by the State agency as an

[[Page 459]]

adequate notice period for its public or general assistance caseload, 
provided that the period includes at least 10 days from the date the 
notice is mailed to the date upon which the action becomes effective. In 
circumstances other than joint processing, the advance notice shall be 
considered timely if the advance notice period includes at least 10 and 
no more than 20 days from the date the notice is mailed to the date upon 
which the action becomes effective.
    (C) The notice of adverse action shall be considered adequate if it 
explains in easily understandable language: The reason for the proposed 
action, the household's right to request a fair hearing, when the 
proposed action will take effect, the telephone number and address of 
someone to contact for additional information and the availability of 
continued benefits. If there is an individual or organization available 
which provides free legal representation, the notice shall also advise 
the household of the availability of the service. The State agency shall 
consult with the ITO in developing the notice of adverse action.
    (D) The State agency shall continue distribution of commodities to 
the household after the end of the adverse notice period if the 
household requests a fair hearing during the advance notice period.
    (c) Reporting changes. (1) Certified households are required to 
report changes in household composition and income which would 
necessitate a change in the determination of eligibility. To facilitate 
reporting changes in income each certified household shall be advised at 
the time of certification what the maximum monthly income limit, as 
defined in Sec. 283.6(e)(1), is for its size household, and shall be 
required to report any change in income that goes above that limit to 
the certification office within ten days after the change becomes known 
to the household. Households must also report within ten days when cash 
on hand, money in checking or savings accounts, savings certificates, 
stocks, or bonds, or other readily negotiable instruments exceeds 
$1,750. The State agency shall develop the procedures for when and how 
changes in household circumstances are reported. Changes reported over 
the telephone or in person shall be acted on in the same manner as those 
reported in writing.
    (2) If the State agency determines that the household is no longer 
eligible or reduces the amount of commodities due the household because 
the household has lost a member or members, the State agency shall 
provide the household with a notice of adverse action not later than ten 
days after the change is reported. If the reported change increases the 
amount of commodities due the household, the household shall be notified 
that the increase shall be effective not later than the month following 
the date the change was reported.
    (d) Recertification. (1) The State agency shall develop a procedure 
for notifying the household prior to or shortly after the end of its 
certification period that the household must reapply and be recertified 
for continued participation. Households shall also be notified of the 
date upon which termination from participation will be effective should 
the household fail to reapply before the expiration of the certification 
period.
    (2) The State agency shall approve or deny a household's application 
for recertification and notify the household of that determination prior 
to the expiration of the household's current certification period. 
Households applying for recertification in the last month of the current 
certification period must be provided an opportunity to obtain commodity 
distribution on an uninterrupted basis.
    (3) The State agency shall continue distribution of commodities to 
the household denied at the point of recertification if the household 
timely requests a fair hearing.
    (e) Controls for dual participation--(1) Prohibition on dual 
participation. No household shall be allowed to participate 
simultaneously in the Food Stamp Program and Food Distribution Program. 
The State agency shall inform each applicant household of this 
prohibition and shall develop a method to detect dual participation. The 
method developed by the State agency shall, at a minimum, employ lists 
of currently certified households provided by and

[[Page 460]]

provided to the appropriate food stamp agency on a monthly basis. The 
State agency may also employ computer checks, address checks and 
telephone calls to prevent dual participation. The State agency shall 
coordinate with the appropriate food stamp agency or agencies in 
developing controls for dual participation.
    (2) Choice of programs. Households eligible for either the Food 
Stamp Program or Food Distribution Program on reservations on which both 
programs are available may elect to participate in either program. Such 
households may elect to participate in one program, and subsequently 
elect the other at the end of the certification period. Households may 
also elect to switch from one program to the other program within a 
certification period only by terminating their participation, and 
notifying the State agency of their intention to switch programs. 
Households certified in either the Food Distribution or Food Stamp 
Program on the first day of the month can only receive benefits in the 
program for which they are currently certified during that month. At the 
point the household elects to change programs the household should 
notify the State agency of its intent to switch programs, and should 
file an application for the program in which it wishes to participate. 
Households voluntarily withdrawing from one program with the intent of 
switching to the other shall have their eligibility terminated for the 
program in which they are currently certified on the last day of the 
month in which the household notifies the State agency of its intent to 
change programs. Entitlement in the program for which a household is now 
filing an application, if all eligibility criteria are met, would begin 
in the month following the month of termination in the previous program.
    (3) Disqualification. (i) No individual disqualified from 
participation in the Food Stamp Program for fraud may participate in the 
Food Distribution Program until the period of disqualification expires. 
The State agency in cooperation with the appropriate food stamp agency 
must develop a procedure to identify these individuals.
    (ii) During the time a household member is disqualified, the 
eligibility and food distribution benefits of any remaining household 
members shall be determined as follows:
    (A) Resources. The resources of the disqualified member shall 
continue to count in their entirety to the remaining household members.
    (B) Income. A pro rata share of the income of the disqualified 
member shall be counted as income to the remaining members. This pro 
rata share is calculated by dividing the disqualified member's earned 
(less the 20 percent earned income deduction) and unearned income evenly 
among all household members, including the disqualified member. All but 
the disqualified member's share is counted as income to the remaining 
household members.
    (C) Eligibility and benefits. The disqualified member shall not be 
included when determining the household's size for purposes of assigning 
food distribution benefits to the household or for purposes of comparing 
the household's net monthly income with the income eligibility 
standards.
    (f) Joint processing PA/GA. (1) State agencies which are responsible 
for and administer both the Food Distribution and public assistance (PA) 
or general assistance (GA) programs on Indian reservations may allow a 
household to apply for the Food Distribution Program at the same time 
the household applies for PA or GA benefits. However, while PA 
households are categorically eligible, GA households except for those 
households in GA programs which have been determined by FCS to have 
criteria of need the same as, or similiar to those under federally aided 
public assistance programs as provided for in Sec. 283.6(c)(2) shall 
have their eligibility for commodities based solely on Food Distribution 
eligibility criteria. All criteria provided in this paragraph (f), are 
applicable to State agencies which administer both the Food Distribution 
and assistance programs and which elect joint processing. Under joint 
processing, the State agency shall use joint application forms that 
contain all the information needed to determine eligibility for 
commodities or shall attach a form for the other needed information.

[[Page 461]]

    (2) The State agency shall process all applications for PA or GA as 
applications for the Food Distribution Program as well, unless the 
household clearly indicates on a space on the application that the 
household does not want commodities. The State agency shall conduct a 
single interview for PA or GA and Food Distribution Program eligibility, 
unless the State agency is unable to do so within the Food Distribution 
Program processing standards specified in Sec. 283.7(a)(7) and 
Sec. 283.7(a)(9). In such cases the State agency shall provide separate 
certification for PA or GA and Food Distribution Program eligibility.
    (3) The State agency may verify those factors of eligibility which 
must be verified for PA or GA, under PA or GA rules, but must follow the 
Food Distribution Program rules for all other factors.
    (4) PA households have the same reporting requirements as any other 
food distribution household. PA households which report a change in 
circumstances to the PA worker shall be considered to have reported the 
change for food distribution purposes. All of the requirements 
pertaining to reporting changes for PA households shall be applied to GA 
households in project areas where GA and food distribution cases are 
processed jointly.
    (5) The State agency must follow all Food Distribution Program 
timeliness rules for certification of households for the Food 
Distribution Program.
    (g) Fair hearing--(1) Availability of hearings. The State agency 
shall provide a fair hearing to any household aggrieved by any action of 
the State agency which affects the participation of the household in the 
Food Distribution Program.
    (2) Timely action on hearings--(i) Receipt of request. Within 60 
days of receipt of a request for a fair hearing, the State agency shall 
conduct the hearing, arrive at a decision and either issue or not issue 
commodities to the household.
    (ii) Household requests for postponement. The household may request 
and is entitled to receive, a postponement of the scheduled hearing. The 
postponement shall not exceed 30 days and, the time limit for action on 
the decision may be extended for as many days as the hearing is 
postponed.
    (3) Notification of right to request hearing. At the time of 
application, each household shall be informed of its right to a hearing, 
of the method by which a hearing may be requested, and that its case may 
be presented by a household member or a representative, such as a legal 
counsel, a relative, a friend or other spokesperson. If there is an 
individual or organization available which provides free legal 
representation, the household shall also be informed of the availability 
of that service. Hearing procedures shall be published by the State 
agency and made available to any interested party.
    (4) Time period for requesting hearing. A household shall be allowed 
to request a hearing on any action by the State agency which occurred in 
the prior 90 days or which affects current benefits.
    (5) Request for hearing. A request for a hearing is any clear 
expression, oral or written, by the household or its representative to 
the State agency that it wishes to present its case to a higher 
authority. The freedom to make such a request shall not be limited or 
interfered with in any way. Upon request, the State agency shall make 
available without charge the specific materials necessary for a 
household or its representative to determine whether a hearing should be 
requested or to prepare for a hearing.
    (6) Denial or dismissal of request for hearing. The State agency 
shall not deny or dismiss a request for a hearing unless:
    (i) The request is not received within the time period specified in 
paragraph (g)(4) of this section;
    (ii) The request is withdrawn in writing by the household or its 
representative; or
    (iii) The household or its representative fails, without good cause, 
to appear at the scheduled hearing.
    (7) Notification of time and place of hearing. The time, date and 
place of the hearing shall be convenient to the household. At least 15 
days prior to the hearing, advance written notice shall be provided to 
all parties involved to permit adequate preparation of the case. The 
notice shall:

[[Page 462]]

    (i) Advise the household or its representative of the name, address, 
and the phone number of the person to notify in the event it is not 
possible for the household to attend the scheduled hearing.
    (ii) Specify that the State agency will dismiss the hearing request 
if the household or its representative fails to appear for the hearing 
without good cause.
    (iii) Include the State agency hearing procedures and any other 
information that would provide the household with an understanding of 
the proceedings, and that would contribute to the effective presentation 
of the household's case.
    (iv) Explain that the household or representative may examine the 
casefile prior to the hearing.
    (8) Hearing official. Hearings shall be conducted by an impartial 
official(s), designated by the State agency, who does not have any 
personal interest or involvement in the case and who was not directly 
involved in the initial determination of the action which is being 
contested. The hearing official shall:
    (i) Administer oaths or affirmations if required by the State;
    (ii) Ensure that all relevant issues are considered;
    (iii) Request, receive and make part of the record all evidence 
determined necessary to decide the issues being raised;
    (iv) Regulate the conduct and course of the hearing consistent with 
due process to ensure an orderly hearing; and
    (v) Render a hearing decision in the name of the State agency, in 
accordance with paragraph (g)(11) of this section, which will resolve 
the dispute.
    (9) Attendance at hearing. The hearing shall be attended by a 
representative of the State agency which initiated the action being 
contested and by the household and/or its representative. The hearing 
may also be attended by friends or relatives of the household upon 
household consent.
    (10) Conduct of hearing. The household may not be familiar with the 
rules of order and it may be necessary to make particular efforts to 
arrive at the facts of the case in a manner that makes the household 
feel most at ease. The household or its representative must be given 
adequate opportunity to:
    (i) Examine all documents and records to be used at the hearing at a 
reasonable time before the date of the hearing, as well as during the 
hearing. The contents of the casefile, including the application forms 
and documents of verification used by the State agency shall be made 
available, provided the confidential information is protected from 
release. The State agency shall provide a free copy of the relevant 
portions of the casefile if requested by the household or its 
representative. Confidential information that is protected from release 
and other documents or records which the household will not otherwise 
have an opportunity to contest or challenge shall not be introduced at 
the hearing or affect the hearing official's decision.
    (ii) Present the case or have it presented by a legal counsel or 
other person.
    (iii) Bring witnesses.
    (iv) Advance arguments without undue interference.
    (v) Question or refute any testimony or evidence, including an 
opportunity to confront and cross-examine adverse witnesses.
    (vi) Submit evidence to establish all pertinent facts and 
circumstances in the case.
    (11) Hearing decisions. (i) Decisions of the hearing officials shall 
comply with Federal law or regulations and shall be based on the hearing 
record. The verbatim transcript or recording of testimony and exhibits 
or an official report containing the substance of what transpired at the 
hearing, together with all papers and requests filed in the proceeding, 
shall constitute the exclusive record for a final decision by the 
hearing official.
    (ii) A decision by the hearing official shall be binding on the 
State agency and shall summarize the facts of the case, specify the 
reasons for the decision and identify the supporting evidence and the 
pertinent FCS regulations. The decision shall become a part of the 
record.
    (iii) The household shall be advised of the decision of the hearing 
official and of the right to pursue judicial review.

[[Page 463]]

    (12) Agency conferences. (i) The State agency shall offer agency 
conferences to households which request an immediate resolution by a 
higher authority of a denial of eligibility for food distribution 
benefits. The State agency may also offer agency conferences to 
households adversely affected by any agency action. The State agency 
shall advise households that use of an agency conference is optional and 
that such use shall in no way delay or replace the fair hearing process. 
The agency conferences may be attended by the eligibility worker 
responsible for the agency action, and shall be attended by an 
eligibility supevisor and/or the agency director, as well as the 
household and/or its representative. An agency conference may lead to an 
informal resolution of the dispute. However, a fair hearing must still 
be held if requested by the household.
    (ii) An agency conference for households requesting an immediate 
resolution by a higher authority of an eligibility issue shall be 
scheduled within four working days of the request unless the household 
requests that it be scheduled later or states that it does not wish to 
have an agency conference.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
0584-0071)

(44 U.S.C. 3506)

[44 FR 35928, June 19, 1979, as amended at 47 FR 746, Jan. 7, 1982. 
Redesignated and amended by Amdt. 1, 47 FR 14137, Apr. 2, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 253.8  Commodity control, storage and distribution.

    (a) Control and accountability. The State agency shall be 
responsible for the issuance of commodities to households and the 
control of and accountability for the commodities upon its acceptance of 
the commodities at time and place of delivery.
    (b) Commodity inventories. The State agency shall, in cooperation 
with the FCS Regional office, develop an appropriate procedure for 
determining and monitoring the level of commodity inventories at central 
commodity storage facilities and at each local distribution point. The 
State agency shall maintain the inventories at proper levels taking into 
consideration, among other factors, household preferences and the 
historical and projected volume of distribution at each site. The 
procedures shall provide that commodity inventories at each central 
storage facility and each local distribution point are not in excess, 
but are adequate for, an uninterrupted distribution of commodities.
    (c) Storage facilities and practices. The State agency shall as a 
minimum ensure that:
    (1) Adequate and appropriate storage facilities are maintained. The 
facilities shall be clean and neat and safe-guarded against theft, 
damage, insects, rodents and other pests.
    (2) Department recommended dunnage, stacking and ventilation methods 
are followed.
    (3) Commodities are stacked in a manner which facilitates an 
accurate inventory.
    (4) Commodities are issued on a first-in, first-out basis.
    (5) Commodities held in storage for a protracted period of time are 
reinspected prior to issuance.
    (6) Out-of-condition commodities are disposed of in accordance with 
Department approved methods.
    (7) Notification is provided to certified households of the location 
of distribution sites and days and hours of distribution.
    (8) An adequate supply of commodities which are available from the 
Department is on hand at all distribution sites.
    (9) Sufficient distribution sites, either stationary or mobile, are 
geographically located or routed in relation to population density of 
eligible households.
    (10) Days and hours of distribution are sufficient for caseload size 
and convenience.
    (11) Households are advised they may refuse any commodity not 
desired, even if the commodities are prepackaged by household size.
    (12) Emergency issuance of commodities will be made to households 
certified for expedited service in accordance with the provisions of 
Sec. 283.7(b)(9).
    (13) Eligible households or authorized representatives are 
identified prior to the issuance of commodities.
    (14) Authorized signatures are obtained for commodities issued and 
the issue date recorded.

[[Page 464]]

    (15) Posters are conspicuously displayed advising program 
participants to accept only those commodities, and in such quantities, 
as will be consumed by them.
    (16) Complete and current records are kept of all commodities 
received, issued, transferred, and on hand and of any inventory 
overages, shortages, and losses.
    (17) A list of commodities offered by the Department is displayed at 
distribution sites so that households may indicate preferences for 
future orders.
    (d) Distribution. The State agency shall distribute commodities only 
to households eligible to receive them under this part. If the State 
agency uses any other agency, administration, bureau, service or similar 
organization to effect or assist in the certification of households or 
distribution of commodities, the State agency shall impose upon such 
organization responsibility for determining that households to whom 
commodities are distributed are eligible under this part. The State 
agency shall not delegate to any such organization its responsibilities 
to the Department for overall management and control of the Food 
Distribution Program.
    (e) Improper distribution or loss of or damage of commodities. State 
agencies shall take action to obtain restitution in connection with 
claims arising in their favor for improper distribution, use or loss, or 
damage of commodities in accordance with the State agency's agreement 
with the Department under Sec. 250.6(b) of part 250 of this chapter and 
the requirements of Sec. 250.6(l) of this same chapter.
    (f) Damaged or out-of-condition commodities. The State agency shall 
immediately notify the appropriate Food and Consumer Service Regional 
Office (FCSRO) if any commodities are found to be damaged or out-of-
condition at the time of arrival, or at any subsequent time, whether due 
to latent defects or any other reason. FCSRO shall advise the State 
agency of the appropriate action to be taken with regard to such 
commodities. If the commodities are declared unfit for human consumption 
in accordance with Sec. 250.7 of part 250 of this chapter, they shall be 
disposed of as provided for under that section. When out-of-condition 
commodities do not create a hazard to other food at the same location, 
they shall not be disposed of until FCSRO or the responsible commodity 
contractor approves. When circumstances require prior disposal of a 
commodity, the quantity and manner of disposition shall be reported to 
the appropriate FCSRO. If any damaged or out-of-condition commodities 
are inadvertently issued to a household and are rejected or returned by 
the household because the commodities were unsound at the time of 
issuance and not because the household failed to provide proper storage, 
care or handling, the State agency shall replace the damaged or out-of-
condition commodities with the same or similar kind of commodities which 
are sound and in good condition. The State agency shall account for such 
replacements on its monthly inventory report.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
0584-0071)

(44 U.S.C. 3506)

[44 FR 35928, June 19, 1979, as amended at 47 FR 746, Jan. 7, 1982. 
Redesignated by Amdt. 1, 47 FR 14137, Apr. 2, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 253.9  Administrative funds for State agencies.

    (a) Payments. Within the limitation of funds available to carry out 
the provisions of this part, FCS shall, beginning with fiscal year 1980, 
make available to each State agency 75 percent of approved 
administrative costs. Any approval for payment of funds in excess of 75 
percent shall be based on compelling justification that such additional 
amounts are necessary for the effective operation of the Food 
Distribution Program on an Indian reservation. Compelling justification 
may include, but not be limited to, such factors as the need for a 
larger Federal contribution during a State agency's first year of 
operation of the program, and the need to assure that no State agency 
currently operating the program receives a level of funding that would 
cause a diminution of program services. Administrative costs must be 
included in annual or revised budget information submitted by the State 
agency to FCS for approval prior to the contribution of Federal funds. 
Administrative costs

[[Page 465]]

must be allowable under part 277 of this chapter.
    (b) Use of funds by State agencies. Any funds received under this 
section shall be used for any costs which are allowable under part 277 
of this chapter and which are incurred in operating the Food 
Distribution Program for households on a reservation. The value of 
services rendered by volunteers, part 277 notwithstanding, shall be 
allowable to meet the matching administrative costs requirements for the 
Food Distribution Program. In no event shall such funds be used to pay 
any portion of such expenses if reimbursement or payment therefor is 
claimed or made available from any other Federal source. State agencies 
shall also adhere to the provisions of part 277 of this chapter, as 
apply to the Food Distribution Program, which establish:
    (1) Uniform requirements for the adminstration of funds to State 
agencies; and
    (2) Principles for determining costs applicable to activities 
assisted by the Food Stamp Program funds provided to State agencies. The 
provisions of part 277 are generally adaptable to this section and the 
appropriate provisions shall be used in complying with paragraphs (b) 
and (f) of this section.
    (c) Application for funds. (1) Any State agency administering an 
ongoing Food Distribution Program which desires to receive 
administrative funds under this section shall submit a Form AD-623, 
``Application for Federal Assistance,'' to the appropriate FCS Regional 
Office at least three months prior to the beginning of a Federal fiscal 
year; except that, for funds needed during fiscal year 1980, the 
application shall be submitted as soon as practicable, but no later than 
60 days followed final publication of this part in the Federal Register. 
The budget information required in part III of the application shall 
reflect by category of expenditure the State agency's best estimate of 
the total amount to be expended in the administration of the Food 
Distribution Program during a Federal fiscal year. FCS may require that 
detailed information be submitted by the State agency to support or 
explain the total estimated amounts shown for each cost budget category. 
Prior to submission by an agency of State government of the AD-623 to 
FCS, it shall be submitted to the State clearinghouse pursuant to part I 
of OMB Circular A-95. ITO's which act as State agencies are encouraged 
to submit the AD-623 to the State clearinghouse.
    (2) Approval of the application by FCS shall be a prerequisite to 
the payment of any funds to State agencies.
    (d) Availability of funds. (1) FCS shall review and evaluate the 
budget information submitted by the State agency in relationship to the 
State agency's plan of operation and any other factors which may be 
relevant to FCS' determination as to whether the estimated expenditures 
itemized by budget category are reasonable and justified. FCS shall give 
written notification to the State agency of (i) its approval or 
disapproval of any or all of the itemized expenditures, (ii) the amount 
of funds which will be made available, and (iii) the period for which 
funds are available.
    (2) FCS shall review and evaluate applications submitted by State 
agencies for administrative funds available under this section in the 
following order of priority and shall give preference in making payments 
of funds under this section in the same order of priority:
    (i) Applications from State agencies which desire to continue a Food 
Distribution Program now in operation,
    (ii) Applications from State agencies, in the order received, which 
FCS determines are immediately capable of effectively and efficiently 
administering the Program, and
    (iii) Applications from other States agencies, in the order 
received.
    (e) Method of payment to State agencies. (1) Payments are made to 
State agencies through a Letter of Credit or an advance by Treasury 
check. The Letter of Credit funding method shall be used by FCS except 
when the advances to be made within a 12 month period are estimated to 
be less than $120,000. However, FCS may, at its option, reimburse a 
State agency by Treasury check regardless of the amount in response to a 
valid claim submitted by the State agency.
    (2) The Letter of Credit funding method shall be done in conjunction

[[Page 466]]

with Treasury Department procedures, Treasury Circular No. 1075 and 
through an appropriate Treasury Regional Disbursing Office (RDO). The 
Standard Form 183, ``Request for Payment on Letter of Credit and Status 
of Funds Report,'' shall be correctly prepared and certified by a duly 
appointed official of the State for requesting payment from an RDO.
    (3) The advance by Treasury check method shall be done by use of the 
Standard Form 270, ``Request for Advance or Reimbursement,'' and 
procedures associated with its use. State agencies receiving payments 
under this method may request payments before cash outlays are made.
    (4) Any State agency receiving payment under the Letter of Credit 
method or the advance by Treasury check method shall have in place and 
in operation, a financial management system which meets the standards 
for fund control and accountability prescribed in part 277 of this 
chapter, as amended. The State agency shall demonstrate on a continuing 
basis its willingness and ability to have and to function within 
procedures that will minimize the time lapse between the transfer of 
funds and its disbursement to meet obligations. For any State agency 
which does not meet the requirement of this paragraph, the reimbursement 
by Treasury check method shall be the preferred method for FCS to make 
payments to that State agency.
    (f) Accounting for funds. Each State agency which receives 
administrative funds under this section shall establish and maintain an 
effective system of fiscal control and accounting procedures. 
Expenditures and accountability of such funds shall be in accordance 
with the appropriate provisions of part 277. The accounting procedures 
maintained by the State agency shall be such as to accurately reflect 
the receipt, expenditure and current balance of funds provided by FCS 
and to facilitate the prompt preparation of reports required by FCS. The 
accounting procedures shall also provide for segregation of costs 
specifically identifiable to the Food Distribution Program from any 
other costs incurred by the State agency. Any budget revisions by a 
State agency which require the transfer of funds from an approved cost 
category to another shall be in accordance with the budget revision 
procedures set forth in OMB Circular No. A-102, Attachment K, and shall 
be approved by FCS prior to any transfer of funds.
    (g) Return, reduction, and reallocation of funds. (1) FCS may 
require State agencies to return prior to the end of the fiscal year any 
or all unobligated funds received under this section, and may reduce the 
amount it has apportioned or agreed to pay to any State agency if FCS 
determines that:
    (i) The State agency is not administering the Food Distribution 
Program in accordance with its plan of operation approved by FCS and the 
provisions of this part, or
    (ii) The amount of funds which the State agency requested from FCS 
is in excess of actual need, based on reports of expenditures and 
current projections of Program needs.
    (iii) Circumstances or conditions justify the return reallocation or 
transfer of funds to accomplish the purpose of this part.
    (2) The State agency shall return to FCS within 90 days following 
the close of each Federal fiscal year any funds received under this 
section which are unobligated at that time.
    (h) Records, reports, audits. (1) The State agency shall:
    (i) Keep such accounts and records as may be necessary to enable FCS 
to determine whether there has been compliance with this section, and
    (ii) Adhere to the retention and custodial requirements for records 
set forth in Sec. 277.4 of this chapter.
    (2) The State agency receiving funds either through a Treasury RDO 
Letter of Credit system or Treasury check shall submit quarterly reports 
to FCS on Form SF-269, ``Financial Status Report,'' by the 30th day 
after close of the reporting quarter and shall submit such other reports 
as may be required by FCS.

[[Page 467]]

    (3) The appropriate provisions of part 277 are adaptable to this 
section for additional guidance.

(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
0584-0071)

(44 U.S.C. 3506)

[44 FR 35928, June 19, 1979, as amended at 47 FR 746, Jan. 7, 1982. 
Redesignated and amended by Amdt. 1, 47 FR 14137, Apr. 2, 1982]


<R03>
PART 254--ADMINISTRATION OF THE FOOD DISTRIBUTION PROGRAM FOR INDIAN HOUSEHOLDS IN OKLAHOMA--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
254.1  General purpose.
254.2  Definitions.
254.3  Administration by an ITO.
254.4  Application by an ITO.
254.5  Household eligibility.

    Authority: Pub. L. 97-98, sec. 1338; Pub. L. 95-113.

    Source: 49 FR 32756, Aug. 16, 1984, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 254.1  General purpose.

    This part sets the requirement under which commodities (available 
under part 250 of this chapter) may be distributed to households 
residing in FCS service areas in Oklahoma. This part also sets the 
conditions for administration of the Food Distribution Program by 
eligible Oklahoma tribes determined capable by the Department.


<R05>
Sec. 254.2  Definitions.

    (a) Exercises governmental jurisdiction means the exercise of 
authorities granted to ITOs under the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of 
1936 or by BIA regulations (25 CFR part 81 et. seq.).
    (b) FCS service area means the areas over which FCS has approved the 
food distribution program in Oklahoma, excluding urban places unless 
approved by FCS under 254.5(b).
    (c) Food Distribution Program means a food distribution program for 
households on Indian reservations administered pursuant to section 4(b) 
of the Food Stamp Act and 1304(a) of Pub. L. 97-98.
    (d) Indian tribal household means a household in which at least one 
household member is recognized as a tribal member by any Indian tribe, 
as defined in Sec. 253.2(d) of this title.
    (e) Indian tribal organization (ITO) means (1) any Indian tribe, 
band, or group organized under the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of 1936, 
and which has a tribal organization approved by the Bureau of Indian 
Affairs; (2) a tribal organization established and approved under 
Federal regulations issued by the Bureau of Indian Affairs; or (3) an 
intertribal council authorized by eligible tribes to act in behalf of 
the tribes to operate the program.
    (f) State agency means the ITO of an Indian tribe, determined by the 
Department to be capable of effectively administering a Food 
Distribution Program, or an agency of State government, which enters 
into an agreement with FCS for the distribution of commodities on an 
Indian reservation.
    (g) Urban place means a town or city with a population of 10,000 or 
more.

[49 FR 32756, Aug. 16, 1984, as amended at 59 FR 1449, Jan. 11, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 254.3  Administration by an ITO.

    (a) Applicability of part 253. All of the provisions of part 253 are 
herein incorporated and apply to part 254, except as specifically 
modified by part 254.
    (b) Section 253.4 Administration, does not apply and is replaced by 
Sec. 254.3.
    (c) Federal administration. Within the Department of Agriculture, 
the Food and Consumer Service (FCS), shall be responsible for the Food 
Distribution Program. FCS shall have the power to determine the amount 
of any claim and to settle and adjust any claim against an ITO.
    (d) ITO administration. The ITO, acting as State agency, shall be 
responsible for the Food Distribution Program within the approved FCS 
service areas if FCS determines the ITO capable of effective and 
efficient administration.
    (e) Qualification as an ITO. The ITO of a tribe in Oklahoma must 
document to the satisfaction of FCS that the ITO meets the definition of 
an ITO in Sec. 254.2, is organized under the provisions of the Oklahoma 
Indian Welfare Act of 1936 or has a tribal organization

[[Page 468]]

established and approved under BIA regulations.

(The information collection requirements contained in paragraph (e) were 
approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
0584-0316)


<R05>
Sec. 254.4  Application by an ITO.

    (a) Application to FCS Regional Office. An ITO which desires to 
participate in the Food Distribution Program shall file an application 
with the FCS Regional Office. The application shall also provide other 
information requested by FCS, including but not limited to, the tribe's 
qualification as a reservation as described in Sec. 254.2, paragraph 
(f). Properly addressed applications shall be acknowledged by the FCS 
Regional Office in writing within five working days of receipt. FCS 
shall promptly advise ITOs of the need for additional information if an 
incomplete application is received.
    (b) Tribal capability. (1) In determining whether the ITO is 
potentially capable of effectively and efficiently administering a Food 
Distribution Program in an FCS Service area, allowing for fulfillment of 
that potential through training and technical assistance, FCS shall 
consult with other sources such as the BIA, and shall consider the ITO 
experience, if any, in operating other government programs, as well as 
its management and fiscal capabilities. Other factors for evaluation 
include, but are not limited to, the ITO's ability to:
    (i) Order and properly store commodities,
    (ii) Certify eligible households,
    (iii) Arrange for physical issuance of commodities,
    (iv) Keep appropriate records and submit required reports,
    (v) Budget and account for administrative funds,
    (vi) Determine the food preferences of households, and
    (vii) Conduct on-site reviews of certification and distribution 
procedures and practices.
    (2) FCS shall make a determination of potential ITO capability 
within 60 days of receipt of a completed application for the Food 
Distribution Program. FCS may, however, extend the period for 
determination of ITO capability if FCS finds that a given ITO's 
eligibility under Sec. 254.3 is difficult to establish.
    (3) FCS shall, if requested by an ITO which has been determined by 
FCS to be potentially capable of administering a Food Distribution 
Program, provide the ITO's designees with appropriate training and 
technical assistance to prepare the ITO to take over program 
administration. In determining what training and technical assistance 
are necessary, FCS shall consult with the ITO and other sources, such as 
the BIA.
    (c) Most capable tribe. In cases where two or more applicant 
tribe(s) have overlapping boundaries, FCS shall select the tribe most 
capable of administering a FDP within that service area.

(The information collection requirements contained in paragaph (a) were 
approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
0584-0316)


<R05>
Sec. 254.5  Household eligibility.

    (a) Certification procedures. All applicant households shall be 
certified in accordance with the eligibility and certification 
provisions in Sec. 253.6 and Sec. 253.7.
    (b) Urban places. No household living in an urban place in Oklahoma 
shall be eligible for the Food Distribution Program on Indian 
Reservations. However, an ITO can request the Department to grant 
individual exemptions from this limitation upon proper justification 
submitted by the ITO as determined by FCS. Such exceptions shall be 
available until September 30, 1985.
    (c) Eligible households. Only Indian tribal households, as defined 
in Sec. 254.2, may be eligible for the Food Distribution Program in FCS 
service areas.

(The information collection requirements contained in paragraph (a) were 
approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 
0584-0316)

[[Page 469]]


<R03>
         SUBCHAPTER C--FOOD STAMP AND FOOD DISTRIBUTION PROGRAM

<R05>


<R03>
PART 271--GENERAL INFORMATION AND DEFINITIONS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
271.1  General purpose and scope.
271.2  Definitions.
271.3  Delegations to FCS for administration.
271.4  Delegations to State agencies for administration.
271.5  Coupons as obligations of the United States, crimes and offenses.
271.6  Complaint procedure.
271.7  Allotment reduction procedures.
271.8  Information collection/recordkeeping--OMB assigned control 
          numbers.

    Authority: 7 U.S.C. 2011-2032.


<R05>
Sec. 271.1  General purpose and scope.

    (a) Purpose of the food stamp program. The food stamp program is 
designed to promote the general welfare and to safeguard the health and 
well being of the Nation's population by raising the levels of nutrition 
among low-income households. Section 2 of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 
states, in part:

    Congress hereby finds that the limited food purchasing power of low-
income households contributes to hunger and malnutrition among members 
of such households. Congress further finds that increased utilization of 
food in establishing and maintaining adequate national levels of 
nutrition will promote the distribution in a beneficial manner of the 
Nation's agricultural abundance and will strengthen the Nation's 
agricultural economy, as well as result in more orderly marketing and 
distribution of foods. To alleviate such hunger and malnutrition, a food 
stamp program is herein authorized which will permit low-income 
households to obtain a more nutritious diet through normal channels of 
trade by increasing food purchasing power for all eligible households 
who apply for participation.

    (b) Scope of the regulations. Part 271 contains general information, 
definitions, and other material applicable to all parts of this 
subchapter. Part 272 sets forth policies and procedures governing State 
agencies which participate in the program. Part 273 describes the 
eligibility criteria to be applied by State agencies and related 
processing requirements and standards. Part 274 provides requirements 
for the issuance of coupons to eligible households and establishes 
related issuance responsibilities. Part 275 sets forth guidelines for 
monitoring the food stamp program, analyzing the results and formulating 
corrective action. Part 276 establishes State agency liability and 
certain Federal sanctions. Part 277 outlines procedures for payment of 
administrative costs of State agencies. Part 278 delineates the terms 
and conditions for the participation of retail food stores, wholesale 
food concerns, meal services, and insured financial institutions. Part 
279 establishes the procedures for administrative and judicial reviews 
requested by food retailers, food wholesalers, and meal services. Part 
280 explains procedures for issuing emergency coupon allotments to 
certain victims of disasters unable to purchase adequate amounts of 
food. Part 281 sets forth guidelines for designating Indian tribes as 
State agencies. Part 282 provides guidelines for initiation, selection, 
and operation of demonstration, research, and evaluation projects. Part 
284 provides for a nutrition assistance program for the Commonwealth of 
the Northern Mariana Islands (CNMI). Part 285 describes the general 
terms and conditions under which grant funds are provided to the 
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.

[Amdt. 132, 43 FR 47882, Oct. 17, 1982, as amended by Amdt. 216, 47 FR 
23461, May 28, 1982; Amdt. 248, 48 FR 16832, Apr. 19, 1983; Amdt. 356, 
59 FR 29713, June 9, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 271.2  Definitions.

    Access device means any card, plate, code, account number, or other 
means of access that can be used alone, or in conjunction with another 
access device, to obtain payments, allotments, benefits, money, goods, 
or other things of value, or that can be used to initiate a transfer of 
funds under the Food Stamp Act of 1977, as amended.
    Active case means a household which was certified prior to, or 
during, the sample month and issued food stamp benefits for the sample 
month.

[[Page 470]]

    Active case error rate means an estimate of the proportion of cases 
with an error in the determination of eligibility or basis of issuance. 
This estimate will be expressed as a percentage of the completed active 
quality control reviews excluding all results from cases processed by 
SSA personnel or participating in a demonstration project identified by 
FCS as having certification rules that are significantly different from 
standard requirements.
    Adequate notice in a periodic reporting system such as monthly 
reporting or quarterly reporting means a written notice that includes a 
statement of the action the agency has taken or intends to take; the 
reason for the intended action; the household's right to request a fair 
hearing; the name of the person to contact for additional information; 
the availability of continued benefits; and the liability of the 
household for any overissuances received while awaiting a fair hearing 
if the hearing official's decision is adverse to the household. 
Depending on the timing of a State's system and the timeliness of report 
submission by participating households, such notice may be received 
prior to agency action, at the time reduced benefits are received, or, 
if benefits are terminated, at the time benefits would have been 
received if they had not been terminated. In all cases, however, 
participants will be allowed ten days from the mailing date of the 
notice to contest the agency action and to have benefits restored to 
their previous level. If the 10-day period ends on a weekend or a 
holiday and a request is received the day after the weekend or holiday, 
the State agency shall consider the request to be timely.
    Alien Status Verification Index (ASVI) means the automated database 
maintained by the Immigration and Naturalization Service which may be 
accessed by State agencies to verify immigration status.
    Allotment means the total value of coupons a household is authorized 
to receive during each month or other time period.
    Application form means: (1) The application form designed or 
approved by FCS, which is completed by a household member or authorized 
representative; or
    (2) For households consisting solely of public assistance or general 
assistance recipients, it may also mean the application form used to 
apply for public assistance or general assistance, including attachments 
approved by FCS, which is completed by a household member or authorized 
represen- tative.
    Assessment an in-depth evaluation of employability skills coupled 
with counseling on how and where to search for employment. If combined 
with work experience, employment search or training, an assessment of 
this nature could constitute part of an approvable employment and 
training component.
    Authorization document means an intermediary document issued by the 
State agency and used in an issuance system to authorize a specific 
benefit amount for a household.
    Authorization to participate card (ATP) means a document which is 
issued by the State agency to a certified household to show the 
allotment the household is authorized to receive on presentation of such 
document.
    Base of Eligibles Employment and training mandatory participants 
plus persons who volunteer for employment and training participation.
    Base Period means the first 6-month reporting period of each fiscal 
year.
    Beginning month(s) in a Monthly Reporting and Retrospective 
Budgeting system means either the first month for which the household is 
certified for food stamps (where the State agency has adopted a one 
month accounting system) or the first month for which the household is 
certified for food stamps and the month thereafter (where the State 
agency has adopted a two month accounting system). Except for beginning 
months in sequence as described in the preceding sentences, a beginning 
month cannot be any month which immediately follows a month in which a 
household is certified. The month following the month of termination 
resulting from a one-month temporary change in household circumstances 
shall not be considered a beginning month.
    Budget month in a Monthly Reporting and Retrospective Budgeting 
system means the fiscal or calendar month

[[Page 471]]

from which the State agency uses income and other circumstances of the 
household to calculate the household's food stamp allotment to be 
provided for the corresponding issuance month.
    Bulk storage point means an office of the State agency or any 
person, partnership, corporation, organization, political subdivision, 
or other entity with which a State agency has contracted for, or to 
which it has assigned responsibility for, the security and storage of 
food coupons.
    Claims collection point means any office of the State agency or any 
person, partnership, corporation, organization, political subdivision or 
other entity with which a State agency has contracted, or to which it 
has assigned responsibility for the collection of claims.
    Communal dining facility means a public or nonprofit private 
establishment, approved by FCS, which prepares and serves meals for 
elderly persons, or for supplemental security income (SSI) recipients, 
and their spouses, a public or private nonprofit establishment (eating 
or otherwise) that feeds elderly persons or SSI recipients, and their 
spouses, and federally subsidized housing for the elderly at which meals 
are prepared for and served to the residents. It also includes private 
establishments that contract with an appropriate State or local agency 
to offer meals at concessional prices to elderly persons or SSI 
recipients, and their spouses.
    Coupon means any coupon, stamp, access device or type of 
certification provided pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter for 
the purchase of eligible food.
    Coupon issuer means any office of the State agency or any person, 
partnership, corporation, organization, political subdivision, or other 
entity with which a State agency has contracted for, or to which it has 
assigned responsibility for, the issuance of coupons to households.
    Deficiency means any aspect of a State's program operations 
determined to be out of compliance with the Food Stamp Act, FCS 
Regulations, or program requirements as contained in the State agency's 
manual, the State agency's approved Plan of Operation or other State 
agency plans.
    Department means the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
    Direct access system means an issuance system in which benefits are 
issued directly to the household, without the use of an intermediary 
document, based on the issuance agent's direct access to information in 
the household's individual record on the master issuance file, which may 
be a card document or an on-line computer system.
    Drug addiction or alcoholic treatment and rehabilitation program 
means any drug addiction or alcoholic treatment and rehabilitation 
program conducted by a private, nonprofit organization or institution, 
or a publicly operated community mental health center, under part B of 
title XIX of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300x et seq.). 
Under part B of title XIX of the Public Health Service Act is defined as 
meeting the criteria which would make it eligible to receive funds, even 
if it does not actually receive funding under part B of title XIX.
    Elderly or disabled member means a member of a household who: (1) Is 
60 years of age or older;
    (2) Receives supplemental security income benefits under title XVI 
of the Social Security Act or disability or blindness payments under 
titles I, II, X, XIV, or XVI of the Social Security Act;
    (3) Receives federally or State-administered supplemental benefits 
under section 1616(a) of the Social Security Act provided that the 
eligibility to receive the benefits is based upon the disability or 
blindness criteria used under title XVI of the Social Security Act;
    (4) Receives federally or State-administered supplemental benefits 
under section 212(a) of Pub. L. 93-66;
    (5) Receives disability retirement benefits from a governmental 
agency because of a disability considered permanent under section 221(i) 
of the Social Security Act.
    (6) Is a veteran with a service-connected or non-service-connected 
disability rated by the Veteran's Administration (VA) as total or paid 
as total by the VA under title 38 of the United States Code;

[[Page 472]]

    (7) Is a veteran considered by the VA to be in need of regular aid 
and attendance or permanently housebound under title 38 of the United 
States Code;
    (8) Is a surviving spouse of a veteran and considered by the VA to 
be in need of regular aid and attendance or permanently housebound or a 
surviving child of a veteran and considered by the VA to be permanently 
incapable of self-support under title 38 of the United States Code;
    (9) Is a surviving spouse or surviving child of a veteran and 
considered by the VA to be entitled to compensation for a service-
connected death or pension benefits for a nonservice-connected death 
under title 38 of the United States Code and has a disability considered 
permanent under section 221(i) of the Social Security Act. ``Entitled'' 
as used in this definition refers to those veterans' surviving spouses 
and surviving children who are receiving the compensation or pension 
benefits stated or have been approved for such payments, but are not yet 
receiving them; or
    (10) Receives an annuity payment under: section 2(a)(1)(iv) of the 
Railroad Retirement Act of 1974 and is determined to be eligible to 
receive Medicare by the Railroad Retirement Board; or section 2(a)(1)(v) 
of the Railroad Retirement Act of 1974 and is determined to be disabled 
based upon the criteria used under title XVI of the Social Security Act.
    (11) Is a recipient of interim assistance benefits pending the 
receipt of Supplemented Security Income, a recipient of disability 
related medical assistance under title XIX of the Social Security Act, 
or a recipient of disability-based State general assistance benefits 
provided that the eligibility to receive any of these benefits is based 
upon disability or blindness criteria established by the State agency 
which are at least as stringent as those used under title XVI of the 
Social Security Act (as set forth at 20 CFR part 416, subpart I, 
Determining Disability and Blindness as defined in Title XVI).
    Eligible foods means: (1) Any food or food product intended for 
human consumption except alcoholic beverages, tobacco, and hot foods and 
hot food products prepared for immediate consumption;
    (2) Seeds and plants to grow foods for the personal consumption of 
eligible households;
    (3) Meals prepared and delivered by an authorized meal delivery 
service to households eligible to use coupons to purchase delivered 
meals; or meals served by an authorized communal dining facility for the 
elderly, for SSI households or both, to households eligible to use 
coupons for communal dining;
    (4) Meals prepared and served by a drug addict or alcoholic 
treatment and rehabilitation center to narcotic addicts or alcoholics 
and their children who live with them;
    (5) Meals prepared and served by a group living arrangement facility 
to residents who are blind or disabled as defined in paragraphs (2) 
through (11) of the definition of ``Elderly or disabled member'' 
contained in this section;
    (6) Meals prepared by and served by a shelter for battered women and 
children to its eligible residents;
    (7) In the case of certain eligible households living in areas of 
Alaska where access to food stores is extremely difficult and the 
households rely on hunting and fishing for subsistence, equipment for 
the purpose of procuring food for eligible households, including nets, 
lines, hooks, fishing rods, harpoons, knives, and other equipment 
necessary for subsistence hunting and fishing but not equipment for the 
purpose of transportation, clothing or shelter, nor firearms, ammunition 
or other explosives;
    (8) In the case of homeless food stamp households, meals prepared 
for and served by an authorized public or private nonprofit 
establishment (e.g. soup kitchen, temporary shelter), approved by an 
appropriate State or local agency, that feeds homeless persons; and
    (9) In the case of homeless food stamp households, meals prepared by 
a restaurant which contracts with an appropriate State agency to serve 
meals to homeless persons at concessional (low or reduced) prices.
    Employment and training (E&T) component a work experience, work 
training or job search program, as described in section 6(d)(4)(B)(iv) 
of the Food Stamp

[[Page 473]]

Act of 1977 (7 U.S.C. 2014(2)(4)(B)) designed to help food stamp 
recipients move promptly into unsubsidized employment.
    Employment and training (E&T) mandatory participant a Food Stamp 
Program applicant or participant who is required to work register under 
7 U.S.C. 2014(d)(1) or (2) and who the State determines should not be 
exempted from participation in an employment and training program.
    Employment and training (E&T) program a program operated by each 
State agency consisting of one or more work, training, education or job 
search components.
    Error for active cases results when a determination is made by a 
quality control reviewer that a household which received food coupons 
during the sample month is ineligible or received an incorrect 
allotment. Thus, errors in active cases involve dollar loss to either 
the participant or the government. For negative cases, an ``error'' 
means that the reviewer determines that the decision to deny or 
terminate a household was incorrect.
    Exempted for purposes of Sec. 273.7 excluding paragraphs (a) and 
(b)--this term refers to a work registered person or persons excused by 
the State, under the conditions in Sec. 273.7(f) from participation in 
an employment and training program.
    Exercises governmental jurisdiction means the active exercise of the 
legislative, executive or judicial powers of government by an Indian 
tribal organization.
    Federal fiscal year means a period of 12 calendar months beginning 
with each October 1 and ending with September 30 of the following 
calendar year.
    Firm's practice means the usual manner in which personnel of a firm 
or store accept food coupons as shown by the actions of the personnel at 
the time of the investigation.
    FCS means the Food and Consumer Service of the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture.
    Food Stamp Act means the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (Pub. L. 95-113), 
including any subsequent amendments thereto.
    General assistance (GA) means cash or another form of assistance, 
excluding in-kind assistance, financed by State or local funds as part 
of a program which provides assistance to cover living expenses or other 
basic needs intended to promote the health or well-being of recipients.
    Group living arrangement means a public or private nonprofit 
residential setting that serves no more than sixteen residents that is 
certified by the appropriate agency or agencies of the State under 
regulations issued under section 1616(e) of the Social Security Act or 
under standards determined by the Secretary to be comparable to 
standards implemented by appropriate State agencies under section 
1616(e) of the Social Security Act. To be eligible for food stamp 
benefits, a resident of such a group living arrangement must be blind or 
disabled as defined in paragraphs (2) through (11) of the definition of 
``Elderly or disabled member'' contained in this section.
    Homeless individual means an individual who lacks a fixed and 
regular nighttime residence or an individual whose primary nighttime 
residence is: (1) A supervised shelter designed to provide temporary 
accommodations (such as a welfare hotel or congregate shelter);
    (2) A halfway house or similar institution that provides temporary 
residence for individuals intended to be institutionalized;
    (3) A temporary accommodation in the residence of another 
individual; or
    (4) A place not designed for, or ordinarily used, as a regular 
sleeping accommodation for human beings (a hallway, a bus station, a 
lobby or similar places).
    Homeless meal provider means:
    (1) A public or private nonprofit establishment (e.g., soup 
kitchens, temporary shelters) that feeds homeless persons; or
    (2) A restaurant which contracts with an appropriate State agency to 
offer meals at concessional (low or reduced) prices to homeless persons.
    House-to-house trade route means any retail food business operated 
from a truck, bus, pushcart, or other mobile vehicle.

[[Page 474]]

    Identification (ID) card means a card which identifies the bearer as 
eligible to receive and use food coupons.
    Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) means the Immigration 
and Naturalization Service, U.S. Department of Justice.
    Indian tribe means: (1) Any Indian tribe, Band, Nation, or other 
organized Indian group on a reservation for example, a Rancheria, Pueblo 
or Colony, and including any Alaska Native Village or regional or 
village corporation (established pursuant to the Alaska Native Claims 
Settlement Act (85 Stat. 688)), that is on a reservation and is 
recognized as eligible for Federal programs and services provided to 
Indians because of their status as Indians; or (2) any Indian tribe or 
Band on a reservation holding a treaty with a State government.
    Indian tribal organization (ITO) means: (1) The recognized governing 
body of any Indian tribe on a reservation; or (2) the tribally 
recognized intertribal organization which the recognized governing 
bodies of two or more Indian tribes on a reservation authorizes to 
operate the Food Stamp Program or a Food Distribution Program on their 
behalf.
    Insured financial institution means a financial institution insured 
by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) or financial 
institutions which are insured under the Federal Credit Union Act and 
which have retail food stores or wholesale food concerns in their field 
of membership.
    Issuance month in a Monthly Reporting and Retrospective Budgeting 
system means the fiscal or calendar month for which the State agency 
shall issue a food stamp allotment. Issuance is based upon income and 
circumstances in the corresponding budget month. In prospective 
budgeting, the budget month and issuance month are the same. In 
retrospective budgeting, the issuance month follows the budget month and 
the issuance month shall begin within 32 days after the end of the 
budget month.
    Large project area means those project areas/management units with 
monthly active caseloads of more than 15,000 households based on the 
most current information available at the time the large project area 
review schedule is developed.
    Low-income household means a household whose annual income does not 
exceed 125 percent of the Office of Management and Budget poverty 
guidelines.
    Management Evaluation (ME) reviews means reviews conducted by States 
at the project area level to determine if State agencies are 
administering and operating the Food Stamp Program in accordance with 
program requirements.
    Management unit means an area based on a welfare district, region, 
or other administrative structure designated by the State agency and 
approved by FCS to be reviewed for ME review purposes.
    Master issuance file means a cumulative file containing the 
individual records and status of households, and the amount of benefits, 
if any, each household is authorized to receive.
    Meal delivery service means a political subdivision, a private 
nonprofit organization, or a private establishment with which a State or 
local agency has contracted for the preparation and delivery of meals at 
concessional prices to elderly persons, and their spouses, and to the 
physically or mentally handicapped and persons otherwise disabled, and 
their spouses, such that they are unable to adequately prepare all of 
their meals.
    Medicaid means medical assistance under title XIX of the Social 
Security Act, as amended.
    Medium project area means those project areas/management units with 
monthly active caseloads of 2,001 to 15,000 households based on the most 
current information available at the time the medium project area review 
schedule is developed.
    Minimum benefit means the minimum monthly amount of food stamps that 
one- and two-person households receive. The amount of the minimum 
benefit will be reviewed annually and adjusted to the nearest $5 each 
October 1 based upon the percentage change in the Thrifty Food Plan for 
the twelve month period ending the preceding June.
    National standard payment error rate means the weighted mean of all 
States'

[[Page 475]]

payment error rates during a base period.
    Negative case means a household which was denied certification or 
whose food stamp benefits were terminated effective for the sample 
month.
    Negative case error rate means an estimate of the proportion of 
denied or terminated cases where the household was incorrectly denied or 
terminated. This estimate will be expressed as a percentage of completed 
negative QC reviews excluding those cases denied based upon processing 
by SSA personnel or denied/terminated based upon the rules of certain 
demonstration projects.
    Newly work registered food stamp participants work registered at the 
point of application.
    Nonprofit cooperative food purchasing venture means any private 
nonprofit association of consumers whose members pool their resources to 
buy food.
    Offset year means the calendar year during which offsets may be made 
to collect certain recipient claims from individuals' Federal income tax 
refunds.
    Overissuance means the amount by which coupons issued to a household 
exceeds the amount it was eligible to receive.
    Overpayment error rate means the percentage of the value of all 
allotments issued in a fiscal year that are either: (1) Issued to 
households that fail to meet basic program eligibility requirements, or
    (2) Overissued to eligible households.
    Payment error rate means the sum of the point estimates of two 
component error rates: an overpayment error rate and an underpayment 
error rate. Each component error rate is the value of allotments either 
overissued or underissued expressed as a percentage of all allotments 
issued to completed active sample cases, excluding those cases processed 
by SSA personnel or participating in certain demonstration projects 
designated by FCS.
    Placed in an employment and training (E&T) program a State agency 
may count a person as ``placed'' in an employment and training program 
when the individual commences a component or is sent a Notice of Adverse 
Action (NOAA) for noncompliance with a food stamp employment and 
training requirement. Persons who refuse to work register or who 
voluntarily quit a job and are sent a NOAA may not be considered 
``placed''.
    Program means the food stamp program conducted under the Food Stamp 
Act and regulations.
    Project area means the county or similar political subdivision 
designated by a State as the administrative unit for program operations. 
Upon prior FCS approval, a city, Indian reservation, welfare district, 
or any other entity with clearly defined geographic boundaries, or any 
combination of such entities, may be designated as a project area, or a 
State as a whole may be designated as a single project area.
    Prospective budgeting in a Monthly Reporting and Retrospective 
Budgeting system means the computation of a household's food stamp 
allotment for an issuance month based on an estimate of income and 
circumstances which will exist in that month.
    Public assistance (PA) means any of the following programs 
authorized by the Social Security Act of 1935, as amended: Old-age 
assistance, aid to families with dependent children (AFDC), including 
AFDC for children of unemployed fathers, aid to the blind, aid to the 
permanently and totally disabled and aid to aged, blind, or disabled.
    Quality control review means a review of a statistically valid 
sample of active and negative cases to determine the extent to which 
households are receiving the food stamp allotments to which they are 
entitled, and to ensure that negative cases are not incorrectly denied 
or terminated.
    Record-for-issuance file means a file which is created monthly from 
the master issuance file, which shows the amount of benefits each 
eligible household is to receive for the issuance month, and the amount 
actually issued to the household.
    Regulations means the provisions of this subchapter. Regulatory 
citations refer to provisions of this subchapter unless otherwise 
specified.
    Reservation means the geographically defined area or areas over 
which an ITO exercises governmental jurisdiction so long as such area or 
areas are legally recognized by the Federal

[[Page 476]]

or a State government as being set aside for the use of Indians.
    Retail food store means: (1) An establishment or recognized 
department of an establishment, or a house-to-house trade route, whose 
eligible food sales volume as determined by visual inspection, sales 
records, purchase records, or other inventory or accounting 
recordkeeping methods that are customary or reasonable in the retail 
food industry is more than 50 percent staple food items for home 
preparation and consumption;
    (2) Public or private communal dining facilities and meal delivery 
services; private nonprofit drug addict or alcoholic treatment and 
rehabilitation programs; publicly operated community mental health 
centers which conduct residential programs for drug addicts and/or 
alcoholics; public or private nonprofit group living arrangements; 
public or private nonprofit shelters for battered women and children; 
public or private nonprofit establishments, approved by an appropriate 
State or local agency, that feed homeless persons; or a restaurant that 
contracts with an appropriate State agency to provide meals at 
concessional (low or reduced) prices to homeless food stamp households;
    (3) Any stores selling equipment for procuring food by hunting and 
fishing to eligible households in Alaska, as specified in the definition 
of eligible foods;
    (4) Any private nonprofit cooperative food purchasing venture, 
including those whose members pay for food prior to receipt of the food; 
and
    (5) A farmers' market.
    Retrospective budgeting in a Monthly Reporting and Retrospective 
Budgeting system means the computation of a household's food stamp 
allotment for an issuance month based on actual income and circumstances 
which existed in a previous month, the ``budget month.''
    Review date for quality control active cases means a day within the 
sample month, either the first day of the calendar or fiscal month or 
the day the household was certified, whichever is later. The ``review 
date'' for negative cases is the date of the agency's decision to deny 
or terminate program benefits. For no case is the ``review date'' the 
day the QC review is conducted.
    Review period means the 12-month period from October 1 of each 
calendar year through September 30 of the following calendar year.
    Sample frame means a list of all units from which a sample is 
actually selected.
    Sample month means the month of the sample frame from which a case 
is selected (e.g., for all cases selected from a frame consisting of 
households participating in January, the sample month is January).
    Screening an evaluation by the eligibility worker as to whether a 
person should or should not be referred for participation in an 
employment and training program. This activity would not be considered 
an approvable E&T component.
    Secretary means the Secretary of the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
    Shelter for battered women and children means a public or private 
nonprofit residential facility that serves battered women and their 
children. If such a facility serves other individuals, a portion of the 
facility must be set aside on a long-term basis to serve only battered 
women and children.
    Small project area means those project areas/management units with 
monthly active caseloads of 2,000 households or fewer based on the most 
current information available at the time the small project area review 
schedule is developed.
    Spouse refers to either of two individuals: (1) Who would be defined 
as married to each other under applicable State law; or
    (2) Who are living together and are holding themselves out to the 
community as husband and wife by representing themselves as such to 
relatives, friends, neighbors, or tradespeople.
    SSA processed/demonstration case means a case that is participating 
or has been denied based upon processing by SSA personnel or is 
participating or has been denied/terminated based upon the rules of a 
demonstration project with significantly different certification rules 
(as identified by FCS).
    Staple food means those food items intended for home preparation and 
consumption, which include meat, poultry,

[[Page 477]]

fish, bread and breadstuffs, cereals, vegetables, fruits, fruit and 
vegetable juices, and dairy products. Accessory food items, such as 
coffee, tea, cocoa, carbonated and uncarbonated drinks, candy, 
condiments, and spices are not staple foods for the purpose of 
qualifying a firm to participate in the program as a retail food store 
or as a wholesale food concern.
    State means any one of the fifty States, the District of Columbia, 
Guam, the Virgin Islands of the United States, and the reservation of an 
Indian tribe whose ITO meets the requirements of the Food Stamp Act for 
participation as a State agency.
    State agency means: (1) The agency of State government, including 
the local offices thereof, which is responsible for the administration 
of the federally aided public assistance programs within the State, and 
in those States where such assistance programs are operated on a 
decentralized basis, it includes the counterpart local agencies which 
administer such assistance programs for the State agency, and (2) the 
Indian tribal organization of any Indian tribe determined by the 
Department to be capable of effectively administering a Food Stamp 
Program or a Food Distribution Program in accordance with provisions of 
the Food Stamp Act of 1977.
    State Income and Eligibility Verification System (IEVS) means a 
system of information acquisition and exchange for purposes of income 
and eligibility verification which meets the requirements of section 
1137 of the Social Security Act, generally referred to as the IEVS.
    State Wage Information Collection Agency (SWICA) means the State 
agency administering the State unemployment compensation law, another 
agency administering a quarterly wage reporting system, or a State 
agency administering an alternative system which has been determined by 
the Secretary of Labor, in consultation with the Secretary of 
Agriculture and the Secretary of Health and Human Services, to be as 
effective and timely in providing employment related income and 
eligibility data as the two just mentioned agencies.
    Sub-units means the physical location of an organizational entity 
within a project area/management unit involved in the operation of the 
Food Stamp Program, excluding Post Offices.
    Supplemental Security Income (SSI) means monthly cash payments made 
under the authority of: (1) Title XVI of the Social Security Act, as 
amended, to the aged, blind and disabled; (2) section 1616(a) of the 
Social Security Act; or (3) section 212(a) of Pub. L. 93-66.
    Systematic Alien Verification for Entitlements (SAVE) means the INS 
program whereby State agencies may verify the validity of documents 
provided by aliens applying for food stamp benefits by obtaining 
information from a central data file.
    Thrifty food plan means the diet required to feed a family of four 
persons consisting of a man and a woman 20 through 50, a child 6 through 
8, and a child 9 through 11 years of age, determined in accordance with 
the Secretary's calculations. The cost of such diet shall be the basis 
for uniform allotments for all households regardless of their actual 
composition. In order to develop maximum food stamp allotments, the 
Secretary shall make household size and other adjustments in the Thrifty 
Food Plan taking into account economies of scale and other adjustments 
as required by law.
    Trafficking means the buying or selling of coupons, ATP cards or 
other benefit instruments for cash or consideration other than eligible 
food; or the exchange of firearms, ammunition, explosives, or controlled 
substances, as defined in section 802 of title 21, United States Code, 
for coupons.
    Underissuance means the amount by which the allotment to which the 
household was entitled exceeds the allotment which the household 
received.
    Underissuance error rate. (See Underpayment error rate.)
    Underpayment error rate means the ratio of the value of allotments 
underissued to recipient households to the total value of allotments 
issued in a fiscal year by a State agency.
    Universe means all units for which information is desired.
    Variance means the incorrect application of policy and/or a 
deviation between the information that was used to authorize the sample 
month issuance and the verified information that

[[Page 478]]

should have been used to calculate the sample month issuance.
    Wholesale food concern means an establishment which sells eligible 
food to retail food stores or to meal services for resale to households.

[Amdt. 132, 43 FR 47882, Oct. 17, 1978]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 271.2, 
see the List of CFR Sections Affected in the Finding Aids section of 
this volume.


<R05>
Sec. 271.3  Delegations to FCS for administration.

    (a) Delegation. Within the Department, FCS acts on behalf of the 
Department in the administration of the Food Stamp Program with the 
exception of those functions, which may be delegated to other agencies 
within the Department. The right is reserved at any time to withdraw, 
modify, or amend any delegation of authority. When authority is 
delegated to FCS, the responsibilities may be carried out by the 
Administrator or by another official of FCS, or by State agencies with 
respect to claims against households, as designated.
    (b) Claims settlement.  FCS shall have the power to determine the 
amount of and to settle and adjust any claim arising under the 
provisions of the act or this subchapter, and to compromise or deny all 
or part of any claim.
    (c) Demonstration authority. FCS is authorized to undertake 
demonstration projects which test new methods designed to improve 
program administration and benefit delivery. FCS is authorized to 
initiate program research and evaluation efforts for the purposes of 
improving and assessing program administration and effectiveness. The 
procedure for initiating and conducting these projects is established in 
part 282.

[Amdt. 132, 43 FR 47882, Oct. 17, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 271.4  Delegations to State agencies for administration.

    (a) General delegation.  The State agency shall be responsible for 
the administration of the program within the State, including, but not 
limited to:
    (1) Certification of applicant households;
    (2) Issuance, control, and accountability of coupons;
    (3) Developing and maintaining complaint procedures;
    (4) Developing, conducting, and evaluating training;
    (5) Conducting performance reporting reviews;
    (6) Keeping records necessary to determine whether the program is 
being conducted in compliance with these regulations; and
    (7) Submitting accurate and timely financial and program reports.
    (b) Claims delegation.  FCS delegates to the State agency, subject 
to the standards in Sec. 273.18, the authority to determine the amount 
of, and settle, adjust, compromise or deny all or part of any claim 
which results from fraudulent or nonfraudulent overissuances to 
participating households.

[Amdt. 132, 43 FR 47882, Oct. 17, 1978, as amended by Amdt. 207, 47 FR 
52333, Nov. 19, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 271.5  Coupons as obligations of the United States, crimes and offenses.

    (a) Coupons as obligations. Pursuant to section 15(d) of the Food 
Stamp Act, coupons are an obligation of the United States within the 
meaning of 18 United States Code (U.S.C.) 8. The provisions of Title 18 
of the United States Code, ``Crimes and Criminal Procedure,'' relative 
to counterfeiting, misuse and alteration of obligations of the United 
States are applicable to coupons.
    (b) Penalties. Any unauthorized issuance, redemption, use, transfer, 
acquisition, alteration, or possession of coupons, ATP cards, or other 
program access device may subject an individual, partnership, 
corporation, or other legal entity to prosecution under sections 15 (b) 
and (c) of the Food Stamp Act or under any other applicable Federal, 
State or local law, regulation or ordinance.
    (1) Section 15(b)(1) of the Food Stamp Act reads as follows:

    Subject to the provisions of paragraph (2) of this subsection, 
whoever knowingly uses, transfers, acquires, alters, or possesses 
coupons, authorization cards, or access devices in any manner contrary 
to this Act or the regulations issued pursuant to this Act shall, if 
such coupons, authorization cards, or access devices are of a value of 
$5000 or more, be guilty of a felony and shall be fined not more than 
$250,000 or imprisoned for not more than twenty years, or both, and 
shall,

[[Page 479]]

if such coupons or authorization cards are of a value of $100 or more 
but less than $5000 or if the item used, transferred, acquired, altered 
or possessed is an access device that has a value of $100 or more but 
less than $5000 be guilty of a felony and shall upon the first 
conviction thereof, be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned for not 
more than five years, or both, and upon the second and any subsequent 
conviction thereof, shall be imprisoned for not less than six months nor 
more than five years and may also be fined not more than $10,000 or, if 
such coupons or authorization cards are of a value of less than $100, or 
if the item used, transferred, acquired, altered, or possessed is an 
access device that has a value of less than $100, shall be guilty of a 
misdemeanor, and upon the first conviction thereof, shall be fined not 
more than $1000 or imprisoned for not more than one year or both, and 
upon the second and any subsequent conviction thereof, shall be 
imprisoned for not more than one year and may also be fined not more 
than $1000. In addition to such penalties, any person convicted of a 
felony or misdemeanor violation under this subsection may be suspended 
by the court from participation in the food stamp program for an 
additional period of up to eighteen months consecutive to that period of 
suspension mandated by section 6(b)(1) of this Act.

    (2) Section 15(b)(2) of the Food Stamp Act reads as follows:

    In the case of any individual convicted of an offense under 
paragraph (b)(1) of this section, the court may permit such individual 
to perform work approved by the court for the purpose of providing 
restitution for losses incurred by the United States and the State 
agency as a result of the offense for which such individual was 
convicted. If the court permits such individual to perform such work and 
such individual agrees thereto, the court shall withhold the imposition 
of the sentence on the condition that such individual perform the 
assigned work. Upon the successful completion of the assigned work the 
court may suspend such sentence.

    (3) Section 15(c) of the Food Stamp Act reads as follows:

    Whoever presents, or causes to be presented, coupons for payment or 
redemption of the value of $100 or more, knowing the same to have been 
received, transferred, or used in any manner in violation of the 
provisions of this Act or the regulations issued pursuant to this Act, 
shall be guilty of a felony and, upon the first conviction thereof, 
shall be fined not more than $20,000 or imprisoned for not more than 
five years, or both, and upon the second and any subsequent conviction 
thereof, shall be imprisoned for not less than one year nor more than 
five years and may also be fined not more than $20,000 or if such 
coupons are of a value of less than $100, shall be guilty of a 
misdemeanor and, upon the first conviction thereof, shall be fined not 
more than $1,000 or imprisoned for not more than one year, or both, and 
upon the second and any subsequent conviction thereof, shall be 
imprisoned for not more than one year and may also be fined not more 
than $1,000. In addition to such penalties, any persons convicted of a 
felony or misdemeanor violation under this subsection may be suspended 
by the court from participation in the food stamp program for an 
additional period of up to eighteen months consecutive to that period of 
suspension mandated by section 6(b)(1) of this Act.

    (c) Security for coupons and ATP's. All individuals, partnerships, 
corporations, or other legal entities including State agencies and their 
delegatees (referred to in this paragraph as ``persons'') having 
custody, care and control of coupons and ATP's shall, at all times, take 
all precautions necessary to avoid acceptance, transfer, negotiation, or 
use of spurious, altered, or counterfeit coupons and ATP's and to avoid 
any unauthorized use, transfer, acquisition, alteration or possession of 
coupons and ATP's. These persons shall safeguard coupons and ATP's from 
theft, embezzlement, loss, damage, or destruction.
    (d) Coupon issuers. (1) Any coupon issuer or any officer, employee 
or agent, thereof convicted of failing to provide the monthly reports 
required in Sec. 274.5 or convicted of violating part 274 shall be 
subject to a fine of not more than $1,000, or imprisoned for not more 
than 1 year, or both.
    (2) Any coupon issuer or any officer, employee or agent, thereof 
convicted of knowingly providing false information in the reports 
required under Sec. 274.5 shall be subject to a fine of not more than 
$10,000, or imprisoned not more than 5 years, or both.
    (e) Forfeiture and denial of property rights.
    (1) General.
    (i) Any nonfood items, moneys, negotiable instruments, securities, 
or other things of value furnished or intended to be furnished by any 
person in exchange for food coupons, authorization cards, or other 
program benefit instruments or access devices in any manner not 
authorized by the Food Stamp Act or regulations issued pursuant to the 
Act,

[[Page 480]]

shall be subject to forfeiture and denial of property rights. Such 
property is deemed forfeited to the United States Department of 
Agriculture (USDA) at the time it is either exchanged or offered in 
exchange.
    (ii) These forfeiture and denial of property rights provisions shall 
apply to property exchanged or offered in exchange during investigations 
conducted by the Inspector General, USDA, and by other authorized 
Federal law enforcement agencies.
    (iii) These forfeiture and denial of property rights provisions 
shall not apply to property exchanged or intended to be exchanged during 
the course of internal investigations by retail firms, during 
investigations conducted solely by State and local law enforcement 
agencies and without the participation of an authorized Federal law 
enforcement agency, or during compliance investigations conducted by the 
Food and Consumer Service.
    (2) Custodians and their responsibilities.
    (i) The Inspector General, USDA, the Inspector General's designee, 
and other authorized Federal law enforcement officials shall be 
custodians of property acquired during investigations.
    (ii) Upon receiving property subject to forfeiture the custodian 
shall:
    (A) Place the property in an appropriate location for storage and 
safekeeping, or
    (B) Request that the General Services Administration (GSA) take 
possession of the property and remove it to an appropriate location for 
storage and safekeeping.
    (iii) The custodian shall store property received at a location in 
the judicial district where the property was acquired unless good cause 
exists to store the property elsewhere.
    (iv) Custodians shall not dispose of property prior to the 
fulfillment of the notice requirements set out in paragraph 3, or prior 
to the conclusion of any related administrative, civil, or criminal 
proceeding, without reasonable cause. Reasonable cause to dispense with 
notice requirements might exist, for example, where explosive materials 
are being stored which may present a danger to persons or property.
    (v) Custodians may dispose of any property in accordance with 
applicable statutes or regulations relative to disposition. The 
custodian may:
    (A) Retain the property for official use;
    (B) Donate the property to Federal, State, or local government 
facilities such as hospitals or to any nonprofit charitable 
organizations recognized as such under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal 
Revenue Code; or
    (C) Request that GSA take custody of the property and remove it for 
disposition or sale.
    (vi) Proceeds from the sale of forfeited property and any moneys 
forfeited shall be used to pay all proper expenses of the proceedings 
for forfeiture and sale including expenses of seizure, maintenance of 
custody, transportation costs, and any recording fees. Moneys remaining 
after payment of such expenses shall be deposited into the general fund 
of the United States Treasury.
    (3) Notice requirements.
    (i) The custodian shall make reasonable efforts to notify the actual 
or apparent owner(s) of or person(s) with possessory interests in the 
property subject to forfeiture except for the good cause exception if 
the owner cannot be notified.
    (ii) The notice shall:
    (A) Include a brief description of the property;
    (B) Inform the actual or apparent owner(s) of or person(s) with 
possessory interests in the property subject to forfeiture of the 
opportunity to request an administrative review of the forfeiture;
    (C) Inform the actual or apparent owner(s) of or person(s) with 
possessory interests in the property subject to forfeiture of the 
requirements for requesting administrative review of the forfeiture; and
    (D) State the title and address of the official to whom a request 
for administrative review of the forfeiture may be addressed.
    (iii) Except as provided in paragraphs (e)(3) (iv) and (v) of this 
section, notice shall be given within 45 days from the date the United 
States convicts, acquits, or declines to act against the person who 
exchanged the property.

[[Page 481]]

    (iv) Notice may be delayed if it is determined that such action is 
likely to endanger the safety of a law enforcement official or 
compromise another ongoing criminal investigation conducted by OIG, the 
United States Secret Service, the United States Postal Inspection 
Service, or other authorized Federal law enforcement agency.
    (v) Notice need not be given to the general public.
    (4) Administrative review.
    (i) The actual or apparent owner(s) of or person(s) with possessory 
interests in the property shall have 30 days from the date of the 
delivery of the notice of forfeiture to make a request for an 
administrative review of the forfeiture.
    (ii) The request shall be made in writing to the Assistant Inspector 
General for Investigations, Office of Inspector General, USDA, or to 
his/her designee, hereinafter referred to as the reviewing official.
    (iii) A request for an administrative review of the forfeiture of 
property shall include the following:
    (A) A complete description of the property, including serial 
numbers, if any;
    (B) Proof of the person's property interest in the property; and,
    (C) The reason(s) the property should not be forfeited.
    (iv) The requestor may, at the time of his/her written request for 
administrative review, also request an oral hearing of the reasons the 
property should not be forfeited.
    (v) The burden of proof will rest upon the requestor, who shall be 
required to demonstrate, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the 
property should not be forfeited.
    (vi) Should the administrative determination be in their favor, the 
actual or apparent owner(s) of or person(s) with possessory interests in 
the property subject to forfeiture may request that forfeited items be 
returned or that compensation be made if the custodian has already 
disposed of the property.
    (vii) The reviewing official shall not remit or mitigate a 
forfeiture unless the requestor:
    (A) Establishes a valid, good faith property interest in the 
property as owner or otherwise; and
    (B) Establishes that the requestor at no time had any knowledge or 
reason to believe that the property was being or would be used in 
violation of the law; and
    (C) Establishes that the requestor at no time had any knowledge or 
reason to believe that the owner had any record or reputation for 
violating laws of the United States or of any State for related crimes.
    (viii) The reviewing official may postpone any decision until the 
conclusion of any related administrative, civil, or criminal proceeding.
    (ix) The decision of the reviewing official as to the disposition of 
the property shall be the final agency determination for purposes of 
judicial review.

[Amdt. 132, 43 FR 47882, Oct. 17, 1978, as amended by Amdt. 221, 47 FR 
35168, Aug. 13, 1982; Amdt. 269, 51 FR 10782, Mar. 28, 1986; Amdt. 334, 
57 FR 3911, Feb. 3, 1992; 59 FR 51354, Oct. 11, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 271.6   Complaint procedure.

    (a) State agency responsibility--(1) General scope. The State agency 
shall maintain a system of its choosing for handling program complaints 
filed by participants, potential participants, or other concerned 
individuals or groups. This shall not include complaints alleging 
discrimination on the basis of race, sex, age, religious creed, national 
origin, political beliefs or handicap; such complaints shall be handled 
in accordance with Sec. 272.6. This procedure also need not include 
complaints that can be pursued through a fair hearing. Complaints 
regarding such areas as processing standards and service to participants 
and potential participants would generally be handled under this 
complaint procedure.
    (2) Minimum requirements. The State agency shall follow up on 
complaints, resolve complaints and take corrective action where 
warranted, and respond to the complainant on the State agency's 
disposition of the complaint. The State agency shall make information on 
the complaint system and how to file a complaint available to 
participants, potential participants and other interested persons. The 
State agency may make the information available through written 
materials or posters at

[[Page 482]]

certification offices or other appropriate means.
    (3) Complaint analysis. The State agency shall maintain records of 
complaints received and their disposition, and shall review records at 
least annually to assess whether patterns of problems may be present in 
local offices, project areas, or throughout the State. The results of 
this review shall be provided to the Performance Reporting System 
coordinator for appropriate action, and for inclusion, if appropriate, 
in the State Corrective Action Plan in accordance with Sec. 275.16 of 
this chapter. The information provided to the Performance Reporting 
System Coordinator shall include the identification, if any, of 
potential or actual patterns of deficiencies in local offices, project 
areas, or throughout the State, and any identification of causes of 
these problems.
    (4) Monitoring. FCS shall monitor State compliance with these 
requirements through the Performance Reporting System.
    (b) Regional office responsibility. (1) Persons or agencies desiring 
program information or wishing to file a complaint may contact the 
appropriate FCS Regional Office.
    (i) For Delaware, the District of Columbia, Maryland, New Jersey, 
Pennsylvania, Puerto Rico, Virginia, the Virgin Islands of the United 
States, and West Virginia: Mid-Atlantic Regional Office, U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Food and Consumer Service, CN 02150, Trenton, NJ 08650.
    (ii) For Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Mississippi, North 
Carolina, South Carolina, and Tennessee: Southeast Regional Office, U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Food and Consumer Service, 77 Forsyth Street 
SW., suite 112, Atlanta, GA 30303-3427.
    (iii) For Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Ohio and 
Wisconsin: Midwest Regional Office, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food 
and Consumer Service, 77 West Jackson Blvd., 20th Floor, Chicago, IL 
60604-3507.
    (iv) For Arkansas, Louisiana, New Mexico, Oklahoma, and Texas: 
Southwest Regional Office, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and 
Consumer Service, 1100 Commerce Street, suite 5-C-30, Dallas, TX 75242.
    (v) For Alaska, Arizona, California, Guam, Hawaii, Idaho, Nevada, 
Oregon and Washington: Western Regional Office, U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Food and Consumer Service, 550 Kearny Street, room 400, San 
Francisco, CA 94108.
    (vi) For Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New York, 
Rhode Island, and Vermont: Northeast Regional Office, U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Food and Consumer Service, 10 Causeway St., Boston, MA 
02222-1069.
    (vii) For Colorado, Iowa, Kansas, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, North 
Dakota, South Dakota, Utah, and Wyoming: Mountain Plains Regional 
Office, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Consumer Service, 1244 
Speer Blvd., suite 903, Denver, CO 80204-3581.
    (2) Complainants shall be advised of the appropriate State complaint 
handling and fair hearing procedures. Upon household request, other 
complaints shall be pursued by the Department rather than the State 
agency, unless the complaint is one upon which the complainant wishes to 
request a fair hearing.

[Amdt. 132, 43 FR 47882, Oct. 17, 1978, as amended at 45 FR 71350, Oct. 
28, 1980; Amdt. 187, 45 FR 85699, Dec. 30, 1980; Amdt. 211, 47 FR 53315, 
Nov. 26, 1982; Amdt. 237, 47 FR 57668, Dec. 28, 1982; Amdt. 250, 48 FR 
22130, May 17, 1983; Amdt. 269, 51 FR 10782, Mar. 28, 1986; Amdt. 356, 
59 FR 29713, June 9, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 271.7  Allotment reduction procedures.

    (a) General purpose. This section sets forth the procedures to be 
followed if the monthly food stamp allotments determined in accordance 
with the provisions of Sec. 273.10 must be reduced, suspended, or 
cancelled to comply with section 18 of the Food Stamp Act of 1977, as 
amended. The best available data pertaining to the number of people 
participating in the program and the amounts of benefits being issued 
shall be used in deciding whether such action is necessary.
    (b) Nature of reduction action. Action to comply with section 18 of 
the Food Stamp Act of 1977, as amended, may be a suspension or 
cancellation of allotments for one or more months, a reduction in 
allotment levels for one or more

[[Page 483]]

months or a combination of these three actions. If a reduction in 
allotments is deemed necessary, allotments shall be reduced by reducing 
maximum food stamp allotments amounts for each household size by the 
same percentage. This results in all households of a given size having 
their benefits reduced by the same dollar amount. The dollar reduction 
would be smallest for one-person households and greatest for the largest 
households. Since the dollar amount would be the same for all households 
of the same size, the rate of reduction would be lowest for zero net 
income households and greatest for the highest net income households. 
All one- and two-person households affected by a reduction action shall 
be guaranteed the minimum benefit unless the action is a cancellation of 
benefits, a suspension of benefits, or a reduction of benefits of 90 
percent or more of the total amount of benefits projected to be issued 
in the affected month.
    (c) Reduction method. If a reduction in allotments is deemed 
necessary, the maximum food stamp allotments amounts for all household 
sizes shall be reduced by a percentage specified by FCS. For example, if 
it is determined that a 25 per cent reduction in the maximum food stamp 
allotments amount is to be made, the reduction for all four-person 
households would be calculated as follows: The maximum food stamp 
allotments amount for a four-person household ($209 in November 1980) 
would be reduced by 25% to $157. Then 30 percent of the household's net 
food stamp income would be deducted from the reduced maximum food stamp 
allotments amount. For example, 30 per cent of a net food stamp income 
of $200, $60, would be deducted from the reduced maximum food stamp 
allotments amount ($157), resulting in a reduced allotment of $97.
    (d) Implementation of allotment reductions--(1) Reductions. (i) If a 
decision is made to reduce monthly food stamp allotments, FCS shall 
notify State agencies of the date the reduction is to take effect and by 
what percentage maximum food stamp allotments amounts are to be reduced.
    (ii) Upon receiving notification that a reduction is to be made in 
an upcoming month's allotment, State agencies shall act immediately to 
implement the reduction. Such action could differ from State to State 
depending on the nature of the issuance system in use. Where there are 
computerized issuance systems, the program used for calculating 
allotments shall be altered to reflect the appropriate percentage 
reduction in the maximum food stamp allotments for each household size 
and the computer program shall be adjusted to allow for the minimum 
benefit for one- and two-person households. The computer program shall 
also be adjusted to provide for the rounding of benefit levels of $1, $3 
and $5 to $2, $4 and $6, respectively. FCS will provide State agencies 
with revised issuance tables reflecting the percentage reductions to be 
made in the maximum food stamp allotments amounts and reduce maximum 
food stamp allotments levels. In States where manual issuance is used, 
State agencies shall reproduce the issuance tables provided by FCS and 
distribute them to issuance personnel. State agencies shall ensure that 
the revised issuance tables are distributed to issuance agents and 
personnel in time to allow benefit reductions during the month ordered 
by FCS. In an HIR card system State agencies have the option of enacting 
the reduction in benefits either by changing all HIR cards before 
issuance activity for the affected month begins or by adjusting 
allotments at the point of issuance as each household appears at the 
issuance office.
    (2) Suspensions and cancellations. (i) If a decision is made to 
suspend or cancel the distribution of food stamp benefits in a given 
month, FCS shall notify State agencies of the date the suspension or 
cancellation is to take effect. In the event of a suspension or 
cancellation of benefits, the provision for the minimum benefit for 
households with one or two members only shall be disregarded and all 
households shall have their benefits suspended or cancelled. Upon 
receiving notification that an upcoming month's issuance is to be 
suspended or cancelled, State agencies shall take immediate action to 
effect the suspension or cancellation. This action would involve making 
necessary

[[Page 484]]

computer adjustments, and notifying issuance agents and personnel.
    (ii) Upon being notified by FCS that a suspension of benefits is 
over, State agencies shall act immediately to resume issuing benefits to 
certified households and shall resume benefit issuance as soon as 
practicable.
    (3) Affected allotments. Whenever a reduction of allotments is 
ordered for a particular month, reduced benefits shall be calculated for 
all households for the designated month. However, any household with one 
or two members whose reduced benefits would be less than the minimum 
benefit shall receive the minimum benefit except as provided in 
Sec. 273.10(e)(2). Allotments or portions of allotments representing 
restored or retroactive benefits for a prior unaffected month would not 
be reduced, suspended, or cancelled even though they are issued during 
an affected month.
    (4) Notification of eligible households. Reductions, suspensions and 
cancellations of allotments shall be considered to be Federal 
adjustments to allotments. As such, State agencies shall notify 
households of reductions, suspensions and cancellations of allotments in 
accordance with the notice provisions of Sec. 273.12(e)(1), except that 
State agencies shall not provide notices of adverse action to households 
affected by reductions, suspensions or cancellations of allotments.
    (5) Restoration of benefits. Households whose allotments are reduced 
or cancelled as a result of the enactment of these procedures are not 
entitled to the restoration of the lost benefits at a future date. 
However, if there is a surplus of funds as a result of the reduction or 
cancellation, FCS shall direct State agencies to provide affected 
households with restored benefits unless the Secretary determines that 
the amount of surplus funds is too small to make this practicable. The 
procedures implemented by State agencies for reducing and cancelling 
benefits shall be designed so that in the event FCS directs the 
restoration of benefits, such benefits are issued promptly.
    (e) Effects of reductions, suspensions and cancellations on the 
certification of eligible households. (1) Except as provided in 
paragraph (e)(2) of this section, determinations of the eligibility of 
applicant households shall not be affected by reductions, suspensions or 
cancellations of allotments. State agencies shall accept and process 
applications during a month(s) in which a reduction, suspension or 
cancellation is in effect in accordance with the requirements of part 
273. Determinations of eligibility shall also be made according to the 
provisions of part 273. If an applicant is found to be eligible for 
benefits and a reduction is in effect, the amount of benefits shall be 
calculated by reducing the maximum food stamp allotments amount by the 
appropriate percentage for the applicant's household size and then 
deducting 30 percent of the household's net food stamp income from the 
reduced maximum food stamp allotments amount. If an applicant is found 
to be eligible for benefits while a suspension or cancellation is in 
effect, no benefits shall be issued to the applicant until issuance is 
again authorized by FCS.
    (2) Expedited service. (i) Households eligible to receive expedited 
processing who apply for program benefits during months in which 
reductions or suspensions are in effect, shall have their cases 
processed in accordance with the expedited processing provisions of 
Sec. 273.2(i).
    (A) Those households that receive expedited service in months in 
which reductions are in effect and that are determined to be eligible 
shall be issued allotments that are reduced in accordance with the 
reduction in effect. These reduced allotments shall be made available to 
the households within the benefit delivery timeframe specified in 
Sec. 273.2(i).
    (B) Those households that receive expedited service in months in 
which suspensions are in effect and that are determined to be eligible 
shall have benefits issued to them within the timeframe specified in 
Sec. 273.2(i). However, if the suspension is still in effect at the time 
issuance is to be made, the issuance shall be suspended until the 
suspension is ended.
    (ii) Households eligible to receive expedited processing who apply 
for Program benefits during months in which cancellations are in effect 
shall receive

[[Page 485]]

expedited service. However, the deadline for completing the processing 
of such cases shall be five calendar days or the end of the month of 
application, whichever date is later. All other rules pertaining to 
expedited service, contained in Sec. 273.2(i), shall be applicable to 
these cases.
    (3) The reduction, suspension or cancellation of allotments in a 
given month shall have no effect on the certification periods assigned 
to households. Those participating households whose certification 
periods expire during a month in which allotments have been reduced, 
suspended or cancelled shall be recertified according to the provisions 
of Sec. 273.14. Households found eligible to participate during a month 
in which allotments have been reduced, suspended or cancelled shall have 
certification periods assigned in accordance with the provisions of 
Sec. 273.10.
    (f) Fair hearings. Any household that has its allotment reduced, 
suspended or cancelled as a result of an order issued by FCS in 
accordance with these rules may request a fair hearing if it disagrees 
with the action, subject to the following conditions. State agencies 
shall not be required to hold fair hearings unless the request for a 
fair hearing is based on a household's belief that its benefit level was 
computed incorrectly under these rules or that the rules were misapplied 
or misinterpreted. State agencies shall be allowed to deny fair hearings 
to those households who are merely disputing the fact that a reduction, 
suspension or cancellation was ordered. Furthermore, since the 
reduction, suspension or cancellation would be necessary to avoid an 
expenditure of funds beyond those appropriated by Congress, households 
do not have a right to a continuation of benefits pending the fair 
hearing. A household may receive retroactive benefits in an appropriate 
amount if it is determined that its benefits were reduced by more than 
the amount by which the State agency was directed to reduce benefits.
    (g) Issuance services. State agencies must have issuance services 
available to serve housholds receiving restored or retroactive benefits 
for a prior, unaffected month.
    (h) Penalties. Notwithstanding any other provision of this 
subchapter, FCS may take one or more of the following actions against a 
State agency that fails to comply with a directive to reduce, suspend or 
cancel allotments in a particular month.
    (1) If FCS ascertains that a State agency does not plan to comply 
with a directive to reduce, suspend or cancel allotments for a 
particular month, a warning will be issued advising the State agency 
that if it does not comply, FCS may cancel 100 percent of the Federal 
share of the State agency's administrative costs for the affected 
month(s). If, after receiving such a warning, a State agency does not 
comply with a directive to reduce, suspend or cancel allotments, FCS may 
cancel 100 percent of the Federal share of the State agency's 
administrative costs for the affected month(s).
    (2) If FCS ascertains after warning a State agency as provided in 
paragraph (h)(1) of this section, that the State agency does not plan to 
comply with a directive to reduce, suspend or cancel allotments, a court 
injunction may be sought to compel compliance.
    (3) If a State agency fails to reduce, suspend or cancel allotments 
as directed, FCS will bill the State agency for all over issuances that 
result. If a State agency fails to remit the billed amount to FCS within 
a prescribed period of time the funds will be recovered through offsets 
against the Federal share of the State agency's administrative costs, or 
any other means available under law.

[Amdt. 146, 46 FR 1426, Jan. 6, 1981, as amended by Amdt. 207, 47 FR 
52333, Nov. 19, 1982; Amdt. 211, 47 FR 53315, Nov. 26, 1982; Amdt. 233, 
47 FR 53830, Nov. 30, 1982; Amdt. 269, 51 FR 10782, Mar. 28, 1986; 54 FR 
24154, June 6, 1989; 56 FR 63596, Dec. 4, 1991; Amdt. 356, 59 FR 29713, 
June 9, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 271.8  Information collection/recordkeeping--OMB assigned control numbers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             Current OMB
       7 CFR section where requirements are described        control no.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
271.7 (d)..................................................    0584-0064
272.1 (d)..................................................    0584-0274
272.1 (f)..................................................    0584-0009
                                                               0584-0010
                                                               0584-0015

[[Page 486]]

                                                                        
                                                               0584-0022
                                                               0584-0025
                                                               0584-0034
                                                               0584-0037
                                                               0584-0052
                                                               0584-0053
                                                               0584-0064
                                                               0584-0069
                                                               0584-0074
                                                               0584-0080
                                                               0584-0081
                                                               0584-0083
                                                               0584-0124
                                                               0584-0274
                                                               0584-0285
                                                               0584-0299
                                                               0584-0301
                                                               0584-0303
                                                               0584-0333
                                                               0584-0334
                                                               0584-0336
                                                               0584-0339
272.2 (a), (c), (d), (e), (f)..............................    0584-0083
272.5 (c)..................................................    0584-0083
272.3 (a), (b), (c)........................................    0584-0083
272.6 (g), (h).............................................    0584-0025
272.7 (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k), (m)....................    0584-0064
273.1 (f), (g).............................................    0584-0064
273.2 (b), (c), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k)...............    0584-0064
273.4 (e)..................................................    0584-0274
273.5 (b)..................................................    0584-0064
273.6 (a), (b), (g)........................................    0584-0064
273.7 (a), (d), (f)........................................    0584-0339
273.7 (c)..................................................    0584-0064
                                                               0584-0083
                                                               0584-0339
273.7 (g)..................................................    0584-0064
273.8 (b), (c), (e), (g), (h), (i).........................    0584-0064
273.9 (d)..................................................    0584-0064
273.10 (a), (c), (e), (f), (g)(1)..........................    0584-0064
273.10 (g)(3)..............................................    0584-0124
273.11 (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (h)...................    0584-0064
273.11 (g).................................................    0584-0334
273.11 (i) (1)-(4).........................................    0584-0080
                                                               0584-0081
273.11 (i)(5)..............................................    0584-0009
                                                               0584-0081
273.11 (i)(6)..............................................    0584-0009
                                                               0584-0080
                                                               0584-0081
273.12 (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f)........................    0584-0064
273.13 (a).................................................    0584-0064
273.14 (a), (b), (c).......................................    0584-0064
273.15 (a), (c), (d), (f), (i), (k), (l), (m), (q).........    0584-0064
273.16 (a), (b), (d), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i)..............    0584-0064
273.17 (h).................................................    0584-0301
273.18 (a), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g), (k)...................    0584-0064
273.18 (h).................................................    0584-0069
273.18 (i).................................................    0584-0053
273.21 (a), (c), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (m), (p),                
 (q).......................................................    0584-0064
273.22 (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g)........................    0584-0285
274.1 (c)..................................................   0584-0009.
274.3 (d)..................................................   0584-0009,
                                                              0584-0069,
                                                              0584-0080.
274.4 (a)..................................................   0584-0080.
274.4 (b)..................................................   0584-0009,
                                                              0584-0015,
                                                              0584-0080,
                                                              0584-0081.
274.4 (f)..................................................   0584-0009,
                                                              0584-0053.
274.6 (a), (b) and (e).....................................   0584-0080,
                                                              0584-0081.
274.7 (a)..................................................   0584-0009.
274.7 (c)..................................................   0584-0022.
274.8 (a)-(c)..............................................   0584-0009.
274.8 (e)..................................................   0584-0053.
274.9 (a)-(d)..............................................   0584-0009.
274.11.....................................................   0584-0009.
275.2 (a)..................................................    0584-0010
                                                               0584-0303
275.4 (a)..................................................    0584-0010
                                                               0584-0303
275.4 (b)..................................................    0584-0010
275.4 (c)..................................................    0584-0034
                                                               0584-0074
                                                               0584-0299
275.5 (a), (b).............................................    0584-0010
275.6 (b)..................................................    0584-0010
275.8 (a)..................................................    0584-0010
275.9 (b), (g).............................................    0584-0010
275.10 (a).................................................    0584-0074
                                                               0584-0299
                                                               0584-0303
275.11 (a).................................................    0584-0303
275.12 (b), (c), (d), (e)..................................    0584-0074
275.12 (f), (g)............................................    0584-0299
275.13 (b), (d), (e).......................................    0584-0034
275.14 (c), (d)............................................    0584-0034
                                                               0584-0074
                                                               0584-0299
275.16 (b), (c), (d).......................................    0584-0010
275.17 (a), (b)............................................    0584-0010
275.18 (a), (b)............................................    0584-0010
275.19 (a), (b), (c).......................................    0584-0010
275.20 (a).................................................    0584-0010
275.21 (b).................................................    0584-0034
                                                               0584-0074
                                                               0584-0299
275.21 (c), (d), (e).......................................    0584-0034
275.22 (a), (b)............................................    0584-0010
275.23.....................................................    0584-0010
                                                               0584-0034
                                                               0584-0074
                                                               0584-0299
276.2 (b)..................................................   0584-0015.
277.12 (a).................................................    0584-0341
277.14 (b), (c), (d), (h), (i), (j), (k)...................    0584-0341
277.15 (c).................................................    0584-0064
277.17 (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g)...................    0584-0341
277.18 (a), (c), (d), (e), (g), (h)........................    0584-0083
278.1 (a), (b), (l)........................................    0584-0008
278.1 (e), (f).............................................    0584-0064
278.4 (b), (c).............................................    0584-0085
278.5 (a)..................................................    0584-0085
                                                               0584-0314
278.5 (c), (d), (f)........................................    0584-0008
278.6 (b)..................................................    0584-0008
278.7 (b), (c).............................................    0584-0008
278.8 (a)..................................................    0584-0008
280.7 (c), (d), (g)........................................    0584-0336
280.9 (b)..................................................    0584-0009
                                                               0584-0037
280.10 (a).................................................    0584-0336
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[50 FR 2660, Jan. 18, 1985, as amended at 54 FR 7002, Feb. 15, 1989; 54 
FR 24527, June 7, 1989; 56 FR 55059, Oct. 24, 1991]

[[Page 487]]


<R03>
PART 272--REQUIREMENTS FOR PARTICIPATING STATE AGENCIES--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
272.1  General terms and conditions.
272.2  Plan of operation.
272.3  Operating guidelines and forms.
272.4  Program administration and personnel requirements.
272.5  Program informational activities.
272.6  Nondiscrimination compliance.
272.7  Procedures for program administration in Alaska.
272.8  State income and eligibility verification system.
272.9  Approval of homeless meal providers.
272.10  ADP/CIS Model Plan.
272.11  Systematic Alien Verification for Entitlements (SAVE) Program.
272.12  Intercept of unemployment compensation benefits.

    Authority: 7 U.S.C. 2011-2032.

    Editorial Note: OMB control numbers relating to this part 272 are 
contained in Sec. 271.8.


<R05>
Sec. 272.1  General terms and conditions.

    (a) Coupons do not reduce benefits. The coupon allotment provided 
any eligible household shall not be considered income or resources for 
any purpose under any Federal, State, or local laws including, but not 
limited to, laws on taxation, welfare, and public assistance programs. 
No participating State or political subdivision shall decrease any 
assistance otherwise provided an individual or individuals because of 
the receipt of a coupon allotment.
    (b) No sales taxes on food stamp purchases. (1) A State shall not 
participate in the Food Stamp Program if State or local sales taxes or 
other taxes or fees, including but not limited to excise taxes, are 
collected within the State on purchases made with food stamp coupons. 
``Purchases made with food coupons'' for purposes of this provision 
shall refer to purchases of ``eligible foods'' as defined in Sec. 271.2. 
Where the total value of groceries being bought by the recipient is 
larger than the amount of coupons being presented by the recipient, only 
the portion of the sale made in exchange for food stamps must be exempt 
from taxation in order for a State to satisfy the requirements of this 
provision. Although a food stamp recipient may use a combination of cash 
and food stamps in making a food purchase, only the dollar amount 
represented by the food coupons needs to be exempt from taxation.
    (2) State and/or local law shall not permit the imposition of tax on 
food paid for with coupons. FCS may terminate the issuance of coupons 
and disallow administrative funds otherwise payable pursuant to part 277 
in any State where such taxes are charged. Action to disallow 
administrative funds shall be taken in accordance with the procedures 
set forth in Sec. 276.4.
    (3) A State or local area which taxes some, but not all, eligible 
food items shall ensure that retail food stores in that locale sequence 
purchases of eligible foods paid for with a combination of coupons and 
cash so as to not directly or indirectly charge or assign a tax to food 
stamp recipients on eligible food items purchased with coupons. 
Prohibited methods include, but are not limited to, the allocation of 
coupons first to non-taxable eligible items, and the application of 
cash, rather than coupons, to taxable eligible food.
    (c) Disclosure. (1) Use or disclosure of information obtained from 
food stamp applicant or recipient households shall be restricted to:
    (i) Persons directly connected with the administration or 
enforcement of the provisions of the Food Stamp Act or regulations, 
other Federal assistance programs, federally-assisted State programs 
providing assistance on a means-tested basis to low income individuals, 
or general assistance programs which are subject to the joint processing 
requirements in Sec. 273.2(j)(2).
    (ii) Persons directly connected with the administration or 
enforcement of the programs which are required to participate in the 
State income and eligibility verification system (IEVS) as specified in 
Sec. 272.8(a)(2), to the extent the food stamp information is useful in 
establishing or verifying eligibility or benefit amounts under those 
programs;
    (iii) Persons directly connected with the verification of 
immigration status of aliens applying for food stamp benefits, through 
the Systematic Alien Verification for Entitlements (SAVE) Program, to 
the extent the information is necessary to identify the individual for 
verification purposes.

[[Page 488]]

    (iv) Persons directly connected with the administration of the Child 
Support Program under part D, title IV of the Social Security Act in 
order to assist in the administration of that program, and employees of 
the Secretary of Health and Human Services as necessary to assist in 
establishing or verifying eligibility or benefits under titles II and 
XVI of the Social Security Act;
    (v) Employees of the Comptroller General's Office of the United 
States for audit examination authorized by any other provison of law; 
and
    (vi) Local, State, or Federal law enforcement officials, upon their 
written request, for the purpose of investigating an alleged violation 
of the Food Stamp Act or regulation. The written request shall include 
the identity of the individual requesting the information and his 
authority to do so, violation being investigated, and the identity of 
the person on whom the information is requested.
    (2) Recipients of information released under paragraph (c)(1) of 
this section must adequately protect the information against 
unauthorized disclosure to persons or for purposes not specified in this 
section. In addition, information received through the IEVS must be 
protected from unauthorized disclosure as required by regulations 
established by the information provider. Information released to the 
State agency pursuant to section 6103(l) of the Internal Revenue Code of 
1954 shall be subject to the safeguards established by the Secretary of 
the Treasury in section 6103(l) of the Internal Revenue Code and 
implemented by the Internal Revenue Service in its publication, Tax 
Information and Security Guidelines.
    (3) If there is a written request by a responsible member of the 
household, its currently authorized representative, or a person acting 
on its behalf to review material and information contained in its 
casefile, the material and information contained in the casefile shall 
be made available for inspection during normal business hours. However, 
the State agency may withhold confidential information, such as the 
names of individuals who have disclosed information about the household 
without the household's knowledge, or the nature or status of pending 
criminal prosecutions.
    (d) Information available to the public. (1) Federal regulations, 
Federal procedures embodied in FCS notices and policy memos, State Plans 
of Operation, and corrective action plans shall be available upon 
request for examination by members of the public during office hours at 
the State agency headquarters as well as at FCS regional and national 
offices. State agency handbooks shall be available for examination upon 
request at each local certification office within each project area as 
well as at the State agency headquarters and FCS Regional offices. State 
agencies, at their option, may require other offices within the State to 
maintain a copy of Federal regulations.
    (2) Copies of regulations, plans of operation, State manuals, State 
corrective action plans, and Federal procedures may be obtained from FCS 
in accordance with part 295 of this chapter.
    (e) Records and reports. Each State agency shall keep such records 
and submit such reports and other information as required by FCS.
    (f) Retention of records. Each State agency shall retain all program 
records in an orderly fashion, for audit and review purposes, for a 
period of 3 years from the month of origin of each record. The State 
agency shall retain fiscal records and accountable documents for 3 years 
from the date of fiscal or administrative closure. Fiscal closure means 
that obligations for or against the Federal government have been 
liquidated. Administrative closure means that the State agency has 
determined and documented that no further action to liquidate the 
obligation is appropriate. Fiscal records and accountable documents 
include, but are not limited to claims and documentation of lost 
benefits. Retention methods for ATP cards are provided in part 274.
    (g) Implementation. The implementation schedule for any amendment to 
the regulations shall be specified in the amendment.
    (1) Amendment 132. Program changes required by Amendment 132 to the 
food stamp regulations shall be implemented as follows:

[[Page 489]]

    (i) State agencies shall eliminate the purchase requirement for all 
households on or before January 1, 1979. The State agency shall 
designate the month the purchase requirement is to be eliminated. If the 
month designated is other than January 1979, the State agency shall 
obtain prior approval of FCS. FCS shall approve the designation of 
months prior to January 1979, if the State agency demonstrates that an 
accounting procedure for the new issuance system will be in place. The 
submission dates for the forms FCS-250 and FCS-256, stipulated in 
Sec. 274.8(a), shall be effective with the reports for the first month 
of issuance without a purchase requirement. For example, if EPR is 
implemented in January, the FCS-250 and FCS-256 for January would be due 
by March 17, 1979. The FCS-259 shall be submitted in accordance with 
Sec. 274.8(a)(3) starting with the quarter beginning January 1979.
    (ii) State agencies may implement all eligibility rules contained in 
part 273 and all issuance rules contained in part 274 at the same time 
the purchase requirement is eliminated, but in no case shall eligibility 
and issuance rules be implemented prior to elimination of the purchase 
requirement. State agencies may also implement portions of part 273 and 
part 274 separately after the purchase requirement is eliminated, 
provided that the eligibility rules setting the income standards, the 
income deductions and the household allotment calculation are 
implemented at the same time, and all rules are implemented no later 
than 3 months after the purchase requirement is eliminated. However, if 
a State agency implements EPR after December 1, 1978, it shall implement 
the certification and other issuance regulations for all new 
applications and recertifications no later than March 1, 1979.
    (iii) State agencies shall have up to 4 months following the first 
day that applications are taken under the new rules, to convert the 
current caseload to the new program. Households coming due for 
recertification during this time will be converted to the new program at 
recertification. Remaining households shall be converted by a desk 
review during that 4-month period. The new income definition, 
deductions, and allotment calculation shall be completed for all 
households which are converted through a desk review. To the extent that 
the case file and other information available to the State agency 
permit, other eligibility criteria, such as work registration, 
resources, tax dependency, and alien status, shall be considered during 
the desk review. Otherwise, nonincome eligibility factors shall be 
deferred until the household's scheduled recertification. In no event 
shall a household's certification period be extended as a result of the 
desk review. Until recertified or converted by a desk review, a 
household shall continue to receive the bonus portion of the allotment, 
calculated in accordance with the income, deduction, and basis of 
issuance provisons of the Food Stamp Act of 1964. During the case file 
conversion period, some households may be participating on the basis of 
the old program rules and some on the new rules. Claims against 
households and restoration of benefits shall not be assessed provided 
that whichever program rules are in use for a particular case are 
correctly applied during the conversion period. However, errors caused 
by miscalculations based on the old or new program rules which result in 
an entitlement to restoration of lost benefits or an overissuance shall 
be assessed in accordance with Secs. 273.17 and 273.18 of these 
regulations. The procedures for calculating lost benefits or 
overissuances as specified in Secs. 273.17 and 273.18 shall be applied 
to any case found to be in error after the implementation of these 
procedures, even though the action which caused the error may have 
occurred prior to the date of implementation. Notwithstanding anything 
to the contrary in the preceding provisions of this paragraph, State 
agencies shall have up to four months following the first day that 
applications are taken under the new rules, to convert the current 
caseload to the new program. Households coming due for recertification 
during this time shall be converted to the new Program at 
recertification. However, if the State agency elects to schedule a desk 
review for these households earlier in the four-month period, conversion 
shall

[[Page 490]]

take place after the desk review. Further, State agencies may elect to 
do a point-in-time computer conversion in lieu of individual desk 
reviews. Such a computer conversion must cover entire categories of 
households, such as public assistance households, all households in a 
particular project area, all households currently in the computer files, 
etc., and the State agency may not elect to postpone the conversion of 
certain cases until recertification.
    (iv) State agencies shall implement Sec. 273.17 on the restoration 
of lost benefits on or before March 1, 1979. State agencies are 
encouraged to implement restoration of lost benefits concurrent with the 
elimination of the purchase requirement, especially as they relate to 
households which are entitled to lost benefits but which have been 
unable to receive them because the households are currently ineligible. 
State agencies shall notify currently ineligible households of the 
availability of their lost benefits by using one of the following 
procedures:
    (A) State agencies which can readily identify the ineligible 
households which are entitled to lost benefits shall notify these 
households and restore the lost benefits within 4 months of the date 
restoration of lost benefits is implemented.
    (B) Other State agencies shall issue a one-time-only press release 
notifying ineligible households that benefits can be restored. The press 
release shall advise households to contact the local food stamp office 
for more information. In addition, State agencies issuing the press 
release shall request the assistance of local Community Action Programs, 
general assistance agencies, legal services programs funded by the Legal 
Services Corporation, State employment service and unemployment 
compensation offices and other State and Federal governmental agencies 
providing services to low-income households, such as the Social Security 
Administration or the Community Services Administration. FCS shall 
provide the State agency with copies of the letter to be used to request 
assistance from outreach organizations and governmental agencies, and 
the fliers and posters which will be distributed upon request to such 
organizations and agencies. The language of the request for assistance, 
the notice to households and the poster is contained in the appendix to 
this rulemaking. State agencies shall mail the request for assistance 
and display posters in all local agency food stamp certification and 
issuance offices and welfare offices within 30 days of receipt from FCS. 
In project areas subject to the bilingual requirements of Sec. 272.4(c), 
State agencies shall provide translations of the posters and fliers. 
Upon request, FCS shall provide Spanish posters and fliers. FCS shall 
reimburse State agencies for all costs of providing translations of the 
posters and fliers in languages other than Spanish. The State agency 
shall display the posters in its offices for six months. Households 
whose entitlement to benefits has been clearly established may apply for 
restoration of lost benefits under this paragraph for an indefinite 
period. Households whose entitlement to restoration of lost benefits was 
established more than three years prior to application for retroactive 
benefits under this paragraph shall be permitted to document entitlement 
if entitlement cannot be verified from State agency records. Such 
households shall sign an affidavit under penalty of perjury explaining 
their entitlement. In lieu of the requirements of this paragraph, State 
agencies may elect to provide notice pursuant to paragraph (g)(1)(iv)(A) 
of this section, in any or all project areas within the State.
    (v) State agencies shall assume the authority to settle or adjust 
recipient claims delegated under Sec. 271.4(b) on or before July 1, 
1979.
    (vi) State agencies without a currently approved utility standard 
required in Sec. 273.9(d)(5) shall develop and implement an FCS approved 
utility standard on or before October 1, 1979. The State agency shall 
notify households certified at the time the utility standard is 
implemented of the availability of the standard and the conditions for 
its use in lieu of actual expenses. Households qualified to use the 
standard and which elect to do so shall have the standard applied as any 
other change in circumstances. Otherwise, actual utility expenses shall 
continue to be used for households qualified for

[[Page 491]]

the standard until their next recertification.
    (vii) State agencies shall advise FCS of their determination of the 
need for bilingual services as required by Sec. 272.4(c) on or before 
December 1, 1978. If the State agency cannot determine, based on 
available information sources, whether or not bilingual services are 
required in particular project areas, it shall so advise FCS on or 
before December 1, 1978. The State agency shall then develop procedures 
to record the number of non-English-speaking low-income households which 
make contact with its offices in these project areas as required by 
Sec. 272.4(c)(6). These procedures shall be implemented on or before 
March 1, 1979, and shall continue for 6 months. The State agency shall 
submit to FCS its determination(s) of the need for bilingual services 
not later than 60 days following the end of the 6-month period. 
Bilingual outreach materials shall be available for distribution within 
90 days of the State agency's determination that such materials are 
required. When the State agency determines that bilingual staff and 
certification materials are required, it shall also make a determination 
of whether volunteers or paid staff will be used. When volunteers are to 
be used, the State agency shall provide the materials and arrange for 
volunteers within 90 days. Paid staff and materials shall be provided 
within 180 days.
    (viii) Prior to the certification of households under these 
regulations, State agencies shall implement staff training for the 
transition as required in Sec. 272.4(e)(3), and training for outreach 
workers, receptionists, and others, as required in Sec. 272.4(e)(1) (v) 
and (vi). Beginning with these training sessions for the transition, 
State agencies shall implement the requirements for public participation 
at training sessions, as specified in Sec. 272.4(e)(1)(iv). State 
agencies shall designate a training coordinator and develop and 
implement the ongoing training program required by Sec. 272.4(e) on or 
before July 1, 1979.
    (ix) Elimination of the purchase requirement and the implementation 
of the basic financial and nonfinancial eligibility criteria and other 
coupon issuance criteria shall not be extended for any reason. FCS may 
grant extensions for other provisions contained in these rules, provided 
that the State agency presents compelling justification for a delay and 
establishes an acceptable alternative schedule in advance of the 
implementation deadline. In no event will FCS grant an extension in 
excess of 120 days from the specified implementation date. In those 
cases where extensions are granted, the relevant Department regulations 
under the Food Stamp Act of 1964 shall remain in effect until superseded 
by implementation of the new rules.
    (2) Amendment 137. Program changes required by Amendment 137 to the 
food stamp regulations shall be implemented for all households initially 
applying for food stamp benefits no later than 90 days following the 
publication of this amendment.
    (3) Amendment 146. The procedures contained in Amendment 146 shall 
be implemented by State agencies in time to be able to issue reduced 
food stamp allotments or to suspend or cancel allotments within 60 days 
after the date of publication of this amendment in the Federal Register.
    (4) Amendment 141. State agencies shall begin planning for and 
conducting ongoing consultations with the Indian tribal organizations of 
the reservations within their jurisdiction as soon as possible after the 
effective date of this amendment. Portions of the State Plan of 
Operation to be submitted for fiscal year 1980 shall be subject to ITO 
comment as required by Sec. 281.2(a). The funding authority in 
Sec. 281.9 shall apply to budgets beginning with the fourth quarter of 
fiscal year 1979.
    (5) Amendment 211. State agencies shall implement the new Social 
Security Number (SSN) provisions for new applicants no later than 
February 1, 1983 and convert the current caseload at recertification or 
when the case is otherwise reviewed, whichever occurs first. The 
citizenship provisions must be implemented on or before April 1, 1983. 
All other provisions shall be implemented at State agency discretion.
    (6) Amendment 149. Changes to States' Quality Control systems as 
required by this amendment shall be implemented as follows:

[[Page 492]]

    (i) All State agencies shall continue conducting modified QC reviews 
[in accordance with regulations published February 9, 1979 (43 FR 8548)] 
through August 31, 1979 and submit Form FCS-133 to FCS by September 15.
    (ii) State agencies shall implement the requirements in subpart C of 
part 275 for conducting QC reviews no later than October 1, 1979. A 
quality control sampling plan (as specified in Sec. 275.11(a) of these 
regulations) must be submitted by each State to the appropriate FCS 
Regional Office no later than September 1, 1979 (30 days prior to 
implementation). This will allow time necessary for approval of the 
plans prior to the October 1 implementation date.
    (iii) State agencies are encouraged to implement QC September 1, if 
possible. States opting to implement early would not be required to 
operate for this month under an approved sampling plan. These States 
must, however, submit sampling plans in accordance with paragraph 
(g)(6)(ii) of this section. The month of September (sampling month) 
would serve as a test phase. Therefore, data collected for the sample 
month would not be required to be submitted to FCS or used in 
determining a State's cumulative allotment error rate.
    (iv) Regulations published October 17, 1978 (43 FR 47846) which 
implement major aspects of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 provide for the 
conversion of cases via a desk review (Sec. 272.1(g)(1)(iii)). Desk 
converted cases would be converted to the new eligibility criteria for 
income and deductions but may not have been converted to the new 
criteria for resources, work registration, tax dependency, etc. 
Therefore, States will have households participating in the program 
based on some of the eligibility criteria of the 1964 Food Stamp Act. 
Desk converted cases as provided in Sec. 272.1(g)(1)(iii) and cases 
which should have been converted via desk review (some cases may not 
undergo the conversion process as required), shall be subject to 
standard QC review procedures. When the QC reviewer detects a variance 
in one of these cases which results from an element of eligibility which 
was not converted and was not required to have been converted, the 
reviewer shall disregard the variance. When the reviewer detects a 
variance in a case when an element of eligibility was, or should have 
been converted, the reviewer shall handle the variance like any other QC 
variance as identified in Sec. 275.12 of these regulations. It is 
possible that desk converted cases may continue to show up in QC samples 
through February 1980.
    (v) State agencies shall submit reports of QC review activity (one 
copy to the appropriate FCS Regional Office and one copy to the Deputy 
Administrator for Family Nutrition Programs, Washington, DC) as follows:
    (A) Each State agency shall report the monthly progress of sample 
selection and completion on a form provided by FCS. This report shall be 
submitted to FCS so that it is received no later than 10 days after the 
end of each month, beginning December 10, 1979. Each report shall 
reflect sampling and review activity for the previous month.
    (B) Each State agency shall report the results of QC review activity 
on a form provided by FCS. This report shall be submitted to FCS so that 
it is received no later than 90 days from the end of the reporting 
period.
    (C) Corrections to information on the above reports requested by FCS 
must be submitted within 10 days of the request.
    (7) Amendment 151. (i) State agencies shall implement the program 
changes required by amendment for all new applications and 
recertifications no later than January 1, 1980. Currently eligible 
households shall be converted at recertification or when they request 
conversion to the new deduction system by responding to the notice 
required in paragraph (g)(7)(iii) of this section or by otherwise 
requesting recomputation.
    (ii) State agencies may but are not required to convert the current 
caseload to the shelter deduction system provided for in 
Sec. 273.9(d)(5) through desk reviews or by computer search. State 
agencies are encouraged to convert eligible households to the new 
shelter deduction as soon as possible to allow these households to 
benefit during the winter months.

[[Page 493]]

    (iii) Notices explaining the changes and their applicability shall 
be available at all food stamp certification offices and shall also be 
mailed or otherwise provided individually to all currently certified 
households at least once prior to implementation. At a minimum, these 
notices shall be distributed in the month prior to implementation either 
with the ATP card or separately but no later than the 15th of the month. 
The notice shall advise the household of the availability of the new 
deductions and the procedures for reporting medical and shelter 
expenses. If the State agency can identify those households to which 
this amendment would apply, only these households need to receive the 
notice.
    (iv) Fliers advising of the changes contained in this amendment 
shall be made available to public and general assistance offices, local 
Social Security offices, and any interested organizations, particularly 
those dealing with the elderly or disabled or those places where the 
elderly or disabled congregate, such as housing units. Also, posters 
explaining the changes shall be displayed in food stamp certification 
offices and shall be made available to public and general assistance 
offices, local Social Security offices and any other interested groups. 
State agencies shall notify all organizations on its outreach contact 
list of the changes and of the availability of posters and fliers. State 
agencies shall issue press releases to the news media advising of the 
impending program changes.
    (v) For the first two months of implementation, State agencies shall 
have up to 30 days to process changes in medical and shelter costs 
reported in conjunction with this amendment. The change shall be 
effective for the first issuance following that 30-day period with 
restoration of lost benefits to the point at which the change would 
normally become effective under Sec. 273.12. The State agency may 
request an extension of processing time of up to 60 days to act on these 
changes. The State agency shall submit appropriate documentation to FCS 
for the State or any part of the State for which such an extension is 
requested. After the first two months the State agency shall act on 
these changes in accordance with the normal processing standards in 
Sec. 273.12(c). For changes reported during a period of two months 
following a State agency's implementation of this amendment, 
verification of shelter and medical expenses required by Sec. 273.2(f) 
must be obtained prior to the issuance of the third normal monthly 
allotment after the change is reported. If the household does not 
provide verification, the household's benefits will revert to the 
original level. State agencies are encouraged to complete such 
verification and, if needed, conduct an interview prior to processing 
the change. After this initial period, State agencies will verify these 
expenses in accordance with the normal timeliness standards.
    (vi) Medical expenses shall be subject to the same rounding 
procedures used for shelter expenses in Sec. 273.10(e)(1)(ii). This 
procedure shall be in effect until implementation of amendments to 
Sec. 273.10(e)(1)(ii).
    (vii) No household shall be entitled to restoration of lost benefits 
under this amendment for any period prior to the time the State agency 
has implemented its provisions. For the initial months after 
implementation, during which the longer processing time allowed under 
this amendment is in effect, a household shall be entitled to 
restoration of lost benefits back to the month the change would have 
become effective under the normal processing standards in 
Sec. 273.12(c). After this initial period, no household shall be 
entitled to restoration of lost benefits unless the State agency does 
not act on reported changes in accordance with the timeliness standards 
in Sec. 273.12(c) or the household is otherwise entitled under the 
provisions of Sec. 273.17.
    (viii) Implementation of these program changes falls in the last 
three months of the October 1979 to March 1980 reporting period for 
quality control. For the months of January, February and March 1980, all 
cases in which a household member is either 60 years of age or over, 
receives SSI, or disability benefits under title II of the Social 
Security Act will be subject to standard quality control review 
procedures, except that any varying information regarding medical 
deductions and/or shelter deductions in excess of

[[Page 494]]

the cap found in the review shall be disregarded in determining errors. 
Such information shall be noted on the Face Sheet of Form FCS-245 under 
part VII, Discrepancies and Other Information, and reported to the State 
agency for appropriate action on an individual case basis. Starting with 
the April-September 1980 reporting period, when the reviewer detects a 
variance in the medical deduction and/or the shelter deduction in excess 
of the cap, and these expenses were reported at application, 
recertification or during the certification period, the reviewer shall 
handle the variance like any other QC variance as identified in 
Sec. 275.12 of the Performance Reporting System regulations.
    (8) Amendment 152. The rounding procedure set forth in 
Sec. 273.10(e) shall be in effect for new applications and 
recertifications no later than July 1, 1980. The State agency shall have 
up to 12 months following the implementation date of final regulations 
to convert the current caseload to the rounding procedure that is chosen 
under Sec. 273.10(e)(1)(ii). The State agency shall have a choice of the 
following three options in converting households that are already 
participating at the time the new rounding procedure goes into effect:
    (i) Convert households at recertification; (ii) convert households 
by conducting a desk review; or (iii) convert all households, or all 
households in a certain category, at a point-in-time. For example, the 
State agency may convert all public assistance households or all 
households in a project area by computer. Point-in-time mass conversions 
shall be conducted no later than July 1, 1980. In any case, the State 
agency shall advise FCS regarding which rounding and caseload conversion 
procedures are chosen and when the conversion will be completed.
    (9) Amendment 154. State agencies shall implement the program 
changes required by Amendment 154 as follows:
    (i) State agencies shall begin requiring social security numbers for 
all new applications and recertifications no later than the first day of 
the first month which commences 120 days from the date of publication of 
final rules. Participating households shall be requested to provide or 
apply for social security numbers (SSN) for appropriate household 
members at recertification, or at the time of office contact for any 
other reason. The State agency shall provide advance notification of 
this requirement and the consequences of noncompliance by sending an 
individual notice to all participating households and by providing press 
releases for dissemination through the media. The individual notices may 
be sent as either a one-time notice prior to implementation and/or with 
the notices of expiration of a certification period.
    (ii) If any affected member(s) of a household does not have his or 
her SSN readily available at the time of application, recertification, 
or any office contact, he or she shall follow the procedures for 
furnishing an SSN in accordance with Sec. 273.6 as amended.
    (iii) State agencies shall implement the fraud claims procedures 
contained in Sec. 273.16 and Sec. 273.18. Implementation shall be no 
later than the first of the month following the 120th day from the date 
of publication of final rules. By implementation the State agency shall 
also have an approved system for handling claims, including a method for 
accounting for the fifty percent retention of the value of funds 
collected from fraud claims. Any collection action on fraud claims after 
implementation is subject to the fifty percent retention including 
claims established under the Food Stamp Act of 1964 as amended and under 
the Food Stamp Act of 1977, as amended. However, only individuals found 
guilty of fraud through an administrative fraud hearing or through a 
court of law under regulations promulgating the Food Stamp Act of 1977, 
as amended, are subject to the recovery provisions in Secs. 273.16 and 
273.18 retroactive to implementation of fraud claim provisions under the 
1977 Act.
    (10) Amendment 207. State agencies shall implement the changes in 
the rules required by Amendment 207 no later than January 1, 1983. 
Disabled parents who requested and were denied separate household status 
on or after September 8, 1982, will be entitled to benefits retroactive 
to the dates of their applications for separate household status.

[[Page 495]]

    (11) Amendment 160. State agencies shall implement the provisions of 
this amendment as follows:
    (i) State agencies shall submit the initial State corrective action 
plans so they are received by FCS within 90 days of publication of these 
regulations as required in Sec. 275.22(a) of this chapter. This initial 
plan shall contain all known deficiencies in the State which meet the 
criteria set forth in Sec. 275.16(b) of this chapter and shall identify, 
for each such deficiency, the items required in Sec. 275.17(b) of this 
chapter. Project areas also shall prepare and submit to the State 
corrective action plans for all identified deficiencies. These plans 
shall be submitted within 60 days of identification of a deficiency and 
shall include any deficiencies known to the project area prior to 
publication of these regulations for which corrective action has not 
been completed. Ninety days after publication of these regulations, all 
provisions of Secs. 275.15, 275.16, 275.17, 275.18, 275.19 and 275.22 of 
this chapter shall be implemented.
    (ii) State agencies shall have submitted management evaluation (ME) 
review schedules within 90 days of publication of these regulations as 
required by Sec. 275.20 of this chapter. These review schedules shall 
contain all information required by Sec. 275.20 of this chapter and 
shall be adhered to unless a change is necessary. If a modification to 
an ME review schedule is necessary at any time in the review period, the 
State shall notify the appropriate FCS Regional Office of the 
modification.
    (iii) State agencies shall implement ME reviews within 90 days of 
publication of these regulations, following the provisions of 
Secs. 275.5, 275.6, 275.7, 275.8, and 275.9 of this chapter. Any waiver 
from the requirements of Sec. 275.7 or Sec. 275.9 must be requested 60 
days prior to its implementation as identified in Sec. 275.5(c). 
Development or submission of requests for a deviation shall not delay 
implementation of the ME review sub-system past the required 
implementation date.
    (iv) All provisions of these regulations which are not addressed in 
paragraphs (g)(11) (i) and (ii) of this section shall be implemented 
within 90 days of publication of these regulations. While this includes 
the requirements for a Performance Reporting System Coordinator and 
designation of an organizational entity for effecting corrective action 
as identified in Sec. 275.2(a) of this chapter, this position and 
designation may be established on an interim basis; provided that the 
provisions of Sec. 275.2(a) of this chapter are fully implemented by 
October 1, 1980. During this interim period States shall ensure that all 
responsibilities of the coordinator or entity are adhered to.
    (12) [Reserved]
    (13) Amendment 162. Program changes required by Amendment 162 of the 
Food Stamp Program regulations shall be implemented as follows:
    (i) The fee agent system for conducting interviews is currently in 
use and its continuing use is approved.
    (ii) All other rules except paragraph (p) of Sec. 272.8 shall be 
implemented as soon as practical but no later than 90 days following the 
date of final rulemaking. A fee agent training plan must be submitted 
within 45 days of the date of final rulemaking. Paragraph (p) of 
Sec. 272.8 concerning points and hours shall be implemented following 
the time standards contained therein.
    (14) Amendment 142. (i) State agencies shall restore lost benefits 
to households who had their eligibility or benefit levels adversely 
affected because Federal energy assistance payments were counted as 
income and/or resources. Entitlement to restoration of lost benefits 
shall be retroactive to October 1, 1979 for payments received under 
CSA's ECAP; to November 27, 1979 for payments received under DHEW's EAP; 
and to January 7, 1980 for the one-time-only energy assistance payments 
to SSI households in accordance with Pub. L. 96-126.
    (ii) State agencies shall use the following procedures for notifying 
households of entitlement to restoration of benefits under Amendment 
142:
    (A) State agencies which can readily identify those SSI households 
who received the one-time payment and those households who received 
payments under the Energy Crisis Assistance or Energy Allowance Programs 
which lost benefits because their energy assistance payment was counted 
as income and/or resources must notify such

[[Page 496]]

households of entitlement to restoration of lost benefits.
    (B) State agencies which cannot readily identify households entitled 
to restoration of lost benefits due to the circumstances described in 
Sec. 272.1(g)(14)(i) must issue a one-time-only press release to notify 
households which have participated since October 1, 1979 of possible 
entitlement to restoration of lost benefits. State agencies may, at 
their option, use additional means of notification such as posters.
    (15) Amendment 163. State agencies shall implement the provisions in 
this amendment no later than July 1, 1980.
    (16) Amendment 174. State agencies shall implement the program 
changes required by Amendment 174 as follows:
    (i) State agencies shall implement the income/resource disregard 
provision for Federal, State, and local energy assistance payments 
(Secs. 273.8 and 273.9 of this subchapter) no later than October 1, 
1981.
    (ii) State agencies shall implement the new maximum resource limit 
and the exemption of vehicles for the physically disabled (Sec. 273.12 
of this subchapter) no later than October 1, 1981 for all new 
applicants. State agencies shall convert the current caseload to the new 
resource limit at the time of recertification, or at any other time the 
casefile is reviewed prior to recertification.
    (iii) State agencies shall implement the student participation 
provisions of this amendment (Secs. 273.1, 273.2, 273.5, 273.7 and 
273.11 of this subchapter) no later than October 1, 1981 for all new 
applicants. Current caseload shall be converted at the time of 
recertification or any time the casefile is reviewed prior to 
recertification.
    (17) Amendment 158. (i) The procedures contained in part 273 
regarding SSI food stamp joint application processing shall become 
effective on August 1, 1980 for all State agencies except that:
    (A) In those areas designated as SSI/Elderly Cash-out Demonstration 
Project Sites or Demonstration Project Comparison Sites, implementation 
of these provisions will be delayed. In addition, Social Security office 
service areas which contain either demonstration projects sites or 
demonstration comparison sites will be temporarily exempted, in their 
entirety, from implementation of these provisions whether or not their 
boundaries are co-terminous with demonstration project sites and/or 
demonstration comparison site boundaries. This temporary exemption 
removes the administrative problem of the same SSA office simultaneously 
operating under both joint processing and cash-out regulations. The 
procedures contained in this rulemaking shall become effective for these 
project areas on the first day of the month following the ninetieth day 
after the termination of the demonstration project.
    (B) State agencies in SSI cash-out States as defined in Sec. 273.20 
shall not implement the provisions of this rulemaking. In the event an 
SSI cash-out State loses that status, the State agency shall implement 
the provisions of this rulemaking on the first day of the month 
following the ninetieth day after the Secretary of Health and Human 
Services determines that the State no longer qualifies for cash-out 
status.
    (ii) State agencies shall distribute fliers advising of the changes 
contained in this amendment to public and general assistance offices, 
local Social Security offices, any interested organizations, 
particularly those dealing with the elderly or disabled, and those 
places where the elderly or disabled congregate, such as housing units 
senior citizens centers, and elderly feeding programs. Also, posters 
explaining the changes shall be displayed in food stamp certification 
offices and shall be made available to public and general assistance 
offices, local Social Security offices and any other interested groups. 
State agencies shall notify all organizations on their outreach contact 
lists of the changes and of the availability of posters and fliers. 
State agencies shall issue press releases to the news media advising of 
the impending program changes. FCS will supply State agencies with model 
language describing the changes which State agencies may use in their 
publications.
    (18) Amendment 168. The provisions of Amendment 168 shall be 
effective on the thirtieth day following their publication. Any claims 
filed against State agencies for incidents that occur after

[[Page 497]]

the publication of this amendment shall be filed in accordance with the 
provisions of this amendment. Any claims filed against State agencies 
for incidents that occurred prior to the publication of this amendment 
shall be filed in accordance with the rules in effect at the time they 
occurred. However, the administrative review procedures contained in 
this amendment shall be applicable to all claims that are filed after 
the effective date of this amendment.
    (19)--(20) [Reserved]
    (21) Amendment 178. State agencies shall implement the provisions of 
Sec. 273.8 and Sec. 273.9 of this amendment for all new applicants no 
later than February 1, 1981. States shall convert the current caseload 
to the new rules at recertification or at the time the case is otherwise 
reviewed, whichever comes first.
    (22) Amendment 179. State agencies shall implement those 
verification procedures mandated in Sec. 273.2 and Sec. 273.8 no later 
than the first of the month 120 days following publication of final 
regulations. State agencies may implement those provisions allowed at 
State agency option in Sec. 273.2 and Sec. 273.12, once the options have 
been approved by FCS and the State certification manuals have been 
revised to incorporate the options.
    (23) Amendment 171. (i) All States operating an ATP issuance system 
shall submit the first Form FCS-46, Food Stamp Reconciliation Report, in 
accordance with Amendment No. 171, for the month of February 1981. This 
report shall be submitted to the FCS Regional Office within 90 days from 
the end of the report month.
    (ii) All States shall submit the Form FCS-388, State Coupon Issuance 
and Particpation Estimates, for February 1981 and each month thereafter. 
Those States that have not submitted procedures for estimating program 
participation, shall submit them to the FCS Regional Office on or before 
February 9, 1981.
    (24) Amendment 186. The procedures of part 275 regarding SSA/food 
stamp joint processing and demonstration cases shall become effective on 
August 1, 1980 for all applicable State agencies. These procedures must 
be implemented by October 1, 1980.
    (25) Amendment 187. State agencies shall implement the complaint 
procedures required by Sec. 271.6(a) no later than 180 days following 
publication of final regulations.
    (26) Amendment 165. State welfare agencies and State employment 
agencies shall implement the provisions of Amendment 165 no later than 
the first of the month following 120 days from publication of amendment 
165 in the Federal Register as follows:
    (i) Both agencies shall begin immediately to develop the work 
registration plan and agreements discussed in Sec. 273.7(c) and (d) of 
Amendment 165. The plan and agreements must be approved and implemented 
within the 120 day timeframe established for implementation of all 
provisions of the final rule.
    (ii) The provisions of amendment 165 shall be applied to households 
at the time of initial application, recertification, or reregistration, 
beginning no later than the first of the month following 120 days from 
publication of the amendment.
    (27) Amendment 189. State agencies shall implement the provisions of 
Amendment No. 189 no later than July 1, 1982.
    (28) Amendment 156. State agencies shall implement the program 
changes required by Amendment 156 within 120 days after publication of 
these regulations, meeting the submittal deadlines outlined in 
Sec. 272.2 and Sec. 272.3.
    (29) Amendment 190. State agencies shall implement these regulations 
no later than January 1, 1982. The rules are effective November 9, 1981.
    (30) Amendment 191. Areas subject to the photo ID card requirement 
must have issued photo ID cards (or cards annotated to indicate that the 
card is valid without a photograph, in accordance with 
Sec. 273.10(g)(4)(ii)(C)) to all participating households, and shall 
require presentation of photo ID cards (or the annotated cards) at 
issuance points as a precondition of issuing coupons to households, no 
later than the first of the month that is 12 months after the 
publication of final regulations. Any areas that become subject to the 
photo ID card requirement at a later date shall also come into full 
compliance no

[[Page 498]]

later than the first of the month that occurs 12 months after FCS 
notifies the State agency that the area is subject to the requirement.
    (31) Amendment 169. The provisions of Amendment 169 shall be 
effective March 30, 1981. These provisions shall apply to the period 
beginning October 1, 1980, except that the provisions of 
Sec. 277.4(b)(2) shall apply to the period October 1, 1978 through 
October 1, 1980. No State shall be subject to sanctions based upon 
quality control error rates for any period prior to October 1, 1980. No 
State shall receive enhanced funding based upon quality control data for 
a period prior to the date upon which its quality control system was in 
operation.
    (32)--(33) [Reserved]
    (34) Amendment 198. State agencies opting to match earnings data 
provided by applicants and participants with information maintained by 
the Social Security Administration shall first execute data exchange 
agreements with the Social Security Administration. After the effective 
date of this rule and after execution of this agreement, State agencies 
may implement wage match provisions at their discretion.
    (35) Amendment 202. State agencies shall implement the provisions of 
Amendment No. 202 as follows:
    (i) The rules shall be implemented no later than October 1, 1981, 
including the provisions for a medical deduction, separate dependent 
care deduction, and uncapped shelter expense deduction for the elderly 
and disabled in Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Virgin Islands. All 
households who apply October 1 or later and those households who are 
recertified October 1, 1981 or later shall be processed in accordance 
with these provisions. The proration of initial month benefits shall 
begin no later than October 1, 1981.
    (ii) Conversion of the current caseload to the new gross income test 
and earned income deduction amount shall be completed no later than 90 
days from October 1, 1981, or 90 days from the date of implementation 
approved through waiver requests in accordance with paragraph 
(g)(35)(vi) of this section.
    (iii) Conversion of the current caseload to the new household 
definition; ineligibility of strikers and boarders; and, in Puerto Rico, 
Guam, and the Virgin Islands, a medical deduction, separate dependent 
care deduction, and uncapped excess shelter expense deduction shall be 
completed at or before recertification. In no event shall the new 
medical, dependent care, and excess shelter provisions for Guam, Puerto 
Rico and the Virgin Islands be implemented prior to October 1, 1981.
    (iv) Notification to affected households of these changes shall be 
done, at a minimum, in the same manner required for mass changes in 
public assistance grants prescribed in Sec. 273.12(e)(2)(ii).
    (v) Beginning October 1,1981, outreach activities engaged in by 
State agencies shall be ineligible for Federal matching funds.
    (vi) FCS will consider requests for waivers to these timeframes, 
except for the timeframe in paragraph (g)(35)(v) of this section, on a 
state-by-state basis, if good cause can be established and justified, in 
writing, for the need for a longer timeframe.
    (36) Amendment 259. State agencies may implement this Monthly 
Reporting and Retrospective Budgeting rule at any time, but shall 
implement this rule no later than January 1, 1984. Prior to January 1, 
1984, this rule may be implemented Statewide, in only part of a State 
(such as in certain project areas), or for only certain reasonable 
classifications of households (such as for only households receiving Aid 
to Families with Dependent Children) so long as the implementation is 
completed by January 1, 1984. State agencies shall have begun to send 
monthly reports to households so that they can report their January 1984 
circumstances in accordance with Sec. 273.21(h). However, the changes in 
the interim provisions made by this final rule need not be implemented 
on January 1, 1984. The changes made by this final rule shall be 
implemented no later than May 1, 1984. Unless otherwise specified in 
Sec. 273.21 of this chapter, all other food stamp regulations shall 
apply to State agencies and to applying or participating households.

[[Page 499]]

    (37) Amendment 205. The procedures extending eligibility to 
otherwise eligible residents of shelters for battered women and children 
contained in Amendment 205 shall be implemented by State agencies no 
later than April 1, 1982.
    (38)-(39) [Reserved]
    (40) Amendment 213. All State agencies shall execute the appropriate 
data exchange agreements and implement the provisions of this amendment 
not later than January 1, 1983. State agencies may opt to match earnings 
data with information maintained by the Social Security Administration 
upon publication of final regulations provided they have executed data 
exchange agreements with the Social Security Administration. State 
agencies which are not prohibited by State law from wage matching with 
agencies administering unemployment compensation may do so upon 
publication of final regulations, provided they have executed the 
appropriate data exchange agreements.
    (41) State agencies shall implement the provisions of Amendment 215 
upon publication.
    (42) Amendment 217. The regulations concerning the optional workfare 
program contained in Amendment 217 shall be in effect November 8, 1982. 
Workfare programs may be implemented after this date provided FCS has 
approved the workfare plan.
    (43) Amendment 220. State agencies shall implement Amendment 220 on 
October 1, 1982.
    (44) Amendment 221. State agencies shall implement on a case by case 
basis the provisions of this rule, excluding the provision which revises 
the application form, beginning the first of the month 30 days from the 
date of publication. The provision requiring a notice of verification on 
the application form shall be implemented on or before the first day of 
the month beginning at least 90 days from the date of publication. If 
the State agency has not depleted its existing supply of application 
forms, the State agency may opt to implement this provision by providing 
an insert to the application form containing the notice of verification.
    (45) Amendment 222. This amendment shall be implemented by the first 
day of the month following the 30th day after publication. As of that 
date prior approval of forms, manuals, instructions, or any other type 
of operating guidelines will no longer be required and waivers will be 
granted or denied based on the new criteria contained herein. 
Additionally, as of that date State agencies shall inform FCS of 
changes, as they occur, in their organizational outline and agreements 
with other agencies. The submission requirement for the Budget 
Projection Statement, Form FCS-366A, as set forth in Sec. 272.2(e) shall 
become effective on August 15, 1983, for the 1984 Federal fiscal year 
beginning October 1, 1983 through September 30, 1984.
    (46) Amendment 225. The State agency shall obtain FCS approval for 
the exclusion of energy assistance provided under any State or local 
program, in accordance with the criteria set forth in Secs. 273.8(e)(14) 
and 273.9(c)(11), within six months of the date of publication of the 
final rule. State or local energy assistance which is not approved 
during this six month period shall cease to be excluded at the end of 
the period. The new provisions concerning restoration of lost benefits 
in Sec. 273.17 (a) and (e) shall be implemented no later than 120 days 
following publication of the final rule.
    (47) Amendment 227. (i) In accordance with Sec. 276.2(b)(3) (iii), 
FCS will hold State agencies strictly liable for losses by issuance 
agents where reconciliation shows noncompliance with photographic 
identification (photo ID) card requirements beginning with the fiscal 
quarter that begins January 1, 1983.
    (ii) State agencies shall include provisions establishing the 
liability to the State agency of an issuing agent for the issuance 
losses covered in Sec. 274.1(b)(6) in the next contract or agreement 
between the State agency and the issuing agent that is entered into or 
renewed after publication of this rule. Not later than one year 
following such publication, all contracts or agreements shall contain 
the required provision establishing the liability. However, failure of 
State agencies to include this language in contracts will not absolve 
the State agencies of the liability referred to in paragraph (g)(47)(i) 
of this section.

[[Page 500]]

    (48) Amendment 228. FCS will consider requests for waivers to 
monthly reporting requirements beginning November 5, 1982.
    (49) Amendment 245. The mail issuance loss rates of 0.75 percent and 
$2,250 are effective January 1, 1983. The mail issuance loss rate of 0.5 
percent and $1,500 are effective October 1, 1983. For the second quarter 
of fiscal year 1983 only, FCS will look at Statewide loss rates and the 
loss rates of individual reporting units within the State. Where the 
loss rate for individual reporting units within the State is over the 
tolerance in that quarter and the Statewide loss rate is also over 
tolerance, FCS will assess liability for losses exceeding the tolerance 
reported for the second quarter of 1983. Where the loss rate for 
individual reporting units within a State are over tolerance for the 
second quarter, but the Statewide loss rate is under tolerance, State 
agencies shall have one additional quarter (the third Fiscal Year 1983 
quarter) to bring such individual reporting units' loss rates into 
compliance with the tolerance levels. Thus for these reporting units, 
FCS will assess liability beginning with the fourth quarter of fiscal 
year 1983 and each quarter thereafter for losses which exceed the 
tolerance levels, regardless of Statewide loss rate. FCS will bill State 
agencies for losses on a semiannual basis.
    (50) Amendment 230. State agencies shall implement the provisions of 
Amendment 230 no later than January 1, 1983.
    (51)-(52) [Reserved]
    (53) Amendment 233. State agencies shall implement these regulations 
no later than February 1, 1983.
    (54) Amendment 234. The provisions of Amendment 234 shall apply to 
those sponsored aliens on behalf of whom the sponsor signed an affidavit 
of support or similar statement (as a condition of the alien's entry 
into the United States as a lawful permanent resident) on or after 
February 1, 1983.
    (55) Amendment 235. Except for the provisions which simply extend 
options to State agencies, State agencies shall implement the changes 
made by Amendment 235 no later than February 1, 1983. Elderly/disabled 
persons who requested and were denied separate household status or other 
considerations granted disabled persons on or after September 8, 1982, 
will be entitled to benefits retroactive to the dates of their 
applications for separate household status or other special 
considerations.
    (56) [Reserved]
    (57) Amendment 240. The provisions of Amendment 240 shall be 
effective on January 11, 1983. The enhanced funding, which the amendment 
implements, is available to political subdivisions retroactive to 
October 1, 1982. The enhanced funding is available to a political 
subdivision for a workfare participant who begins working on or after 
October 1, 1982.
    (58) Amendment 242. State agencies shall implement the 
disqualification penalties for intentional Program violation, and the 
improved recovery of overpayments provisions contained in Amendment 242 
no later than April 1, 1983.
    (i) The provision in Sec. 273.11(c) for handling the income and 
resources of an individual disqualified for intentional Program 
violation shall apply to any individual disqualified for such a 
violation since the implementation of the fraud disqualification 
provisions of the Food Stamp Act of 1977. The disqualification 
procedures for intentional Program violation in Sec. 273.16 shall apply 
to any individual alleged to have committed one or more acts of 
intentional Program violation since the implementation of the fraud 
disqualification provisions under the Food Stamp Act of 1977. However, 
the disqualification penalties in Sec. 273.16(b) shall apply only to 
individuals disqualified for acts of intentional Program violation which 
occur after implementation of this amendment. In addition, the 
disqualification penalties in Sec. 273.16(b) shall apply only to 
individuals disqualified for acts of intentional Program violation which 
occurred either during a certification period based on an application 
form containing these penalties or after receipt of written notification 
from the State agency of these penalties. Recurring acts of intentional 
Program violation which occur over a period of time prior to and after 
implementation of this final rule shall not be separated. Only one 
penalty can be

[[Page 501]]

imposed for such recurring violations and the household member shall be 
disqualified in accordance with the disqualification penalties specified 
in this amendment. The reporting requirements of Sec. 273.16(i) shall 
become effective upon implementation, however, the State agency shall 
have until October 1, 1983, to submit such reports on individuals 
disqualified under previous regulations implementing the Food Stamp Act 
of 1977.
    (ii) The recovery provisions for claims against households in 
Sec. 273.18 shall apply to any overissuance caused by an action which 
occurred after implementation of regulations promulgating the Food Stamp 
Act of 1977, as amended. And, the procedures for calculating the amount 
of overissuances as specified in Sec. 273.18(c) shall apply to any month 
in which an overissuance occurred retroactive to March 1, 1979. However, 
State agency retention of 50 percent of the value of collected 
intentional Program violation claims and 25 percent of the value of 
collected inadvertent household error claims as provided in 
Sec. 273.18(h) shall apply to any collection action retroactive to 
January 1, 1982. The State agency shall have the option of reinstating 
any claim previously suspended, but not terminated, under the recovery 
provisions of regulations implementing the Food Stamp Act of 1977 and, 
once reinstated, such claims shall be subject to the recovery provisions 
contained in this amendment. However, the State agency shall not 
reinstate any amount of a claim compromised or any claim terminated 
under previous regulations implementing the Food Stamp Act of 1977, as 
amended. The submission requirements for the Form FCS-209, Status of 
Claims Against Households, as set forth in Sec. 273.18(h) shall become 
effective with the quarter ending March 31, 1983.
    (59) Amendment 243. (i) State agencies shall implement the 
provisions contained in Sec. 274.1(d) statewide no later than October 1, 
1983. FCS will consider requests for waivers to this timeframe on a 
State-by-State basis if the State agency establishes good cause through 
submission of written justification of the need for a longer timeframe 
and submits a plan that shows when the system will be implemented.
    (ii) State agencies shall implement the correction made to 
Sec. 273.1(a)(1)(iv) retroactive to September 8, 1982.
    (iii) The Commonwealth of Puerto Rico shall implement the changes to 
part 285 on January 1, 1984, as published in the Federal Register for 
December 21, 1984.
    (60) Amendment 244. State agencies shall implement the provisions 
regarding joint food stamp/public assistance case processing at State 
agency discretion. The provisions regarding certification periods must 
be implemented at time of application or at recertification no later 
than July 1, 1983.
    (61) [Reserved]
    (62) Amendment 247. State agencies must implement the provisions 
relative to noncompliance with other programs no later than April 1, 
1985. The provisions relative to disclosure of information must be 
implemented no later than February 1, 1985.
    (63) Amendment 251. State agencies shall implement the program 
changes required by this amendment as follows:
    (i) State agencies shall apply the work registration, job search, 
and voluntary quit provisions of this rule, amending portions of 
Sec. 273.7, to new applicants no later than January 2, 1985. The 
provisions shall apply to participating households at recertification or 
at the time of office contact for any other reason.
    (64) Amendment 252. (i) The sanction/incentive provisions of 
Sec. 275.25 were effective October 1, 1982. The previous provisions of 
Sec. 275.25 shall continue to apply to the review periods prior to 
October 1982.
    (ii) The funding provisions of Sec. 277.4(b)(2) were effective on 
October 1, 1982, and shall apply to the October 1982, through September 
1983, review period and every review period thereafter.
    (iii) The revised funding provisions of Sec. 277.4(b)(7) shall apply 
to the 6-month review periods October 1, 1981 through March 1982 and 
April through September 1982.
    (65) Amendment 253. The provisions of Sec. 274.8(a)(6) (i), (ii), 
and (iii) shall be implemented the first month beginning

[[Page 502]]

on or after the 90th day following publication of this final rule. In 
that month, the FCS-388 report shall provide the actual second preceding 
month data. The initial semiannual coupon issuance and NA/PA household 
and person participation data shall be provided in September 1985 for 
the month of July 1985. State agencies will cease submission of the FCS-
256 report as of July 1985.
    (66) Amendment 254. State agencies shall implement the provisions of 
Amendment 254 no later than October 19, 1983.
    (67) [Reserved]
    (68) Amendment 260. (i) The quality control review provisions 
contained in Amendment 260 are effective starting with the beginning of 
Fiscal Year 1984, except as provided in the following sentences. All 
cases sampled for the six months October 1983 through March 1984 shall 
be disposed of and reported within 95 days of March 31, 1984. Cases 
sampled for April 1984 and for months thereafter shall be disposed of 
and reported according to Sec. 275.21. For example, 90 percent of April 
cases are due within 75 days of April 30, and 100 percent are due within 
95 days of that date. The structure of sample frames specified in 
Sec. 275.11(e) must be implemented no later than the sample month of 
October 1984.
    (ii) Starting with the October 1983 sample month, cases must be 
determined complete, not complete, or not subject to review according to 
Secs. 275.12(g) and 275.13(e). As of the beginning of Fiscal Year 1984 
the sample sizes stated in Sec. 275.11(b) and related sampling plan 
requirements are effective, and State agencies are required to meet the 
completion standard stated in Sec. 275.11(d). State agencies currently 
sampling at the levels provided in Sec. 275.11(b)(1)(iii) must submit to 
their respective FCS Regional Offices the reliability statement required 
by Sec. 275.11(a)(2) within 30 days of the publication of this rule, or 
no later than the second month after publication of this rule begin 
sampling at the levels specified in Sec. 275.11(b)(1)(ii).
    (69) Amendment 261. State agencies shall implement this amendment 
establishing the Alaska urban and rural allotment levels and the new cap 
for Guam no later than August 1, 1984. Households in rural Alaska which 
request retroactive benefits by February 1, 1985 will be entitled to 
retroactive benefits for the period after September 8, 1982, during 
which they lived in rural Alaska and participated in the Food Stamp 
Program in that area. These retroacive benefits will be provided over a 
period of time not to exceed one year. The amount provided each month 
will be the higher of $50 or one-twelfth of the total amount due. 
Households in Guam which request retroactive benefits by February 1, 
1985 will be entitled to retroactive benefits for the period October 1, 
1982, through September 30, 1983, during which they lived in Guam, 
participated in the Food Stamp Program in that area, and were in 
household sizes two, five, or eight or more.
    (70) Amendment 264. These rules are effective on May 29, 1986. No 
later than that date State agencies are required to submit the 
attachment to their State Plan of Operation specified in Sec. 272.2 and 
in Sec. 272.8(i), documenting either full implementation of these rules 
or good faith efforts to implement them. The documentation of full 
implementation or of good faith efforts shall show either that the State 
agency is routinely requesting and using, or shall show the dates when 
it will begin routinely to request the use, information from the various 
data sources specified in Sec. 272.8(a) according to the frequencies for 
requests, timeframes and other requirements of Sec. 272.8(e), (f) and 
(g). Full implementation shall include requests for available 
information from the Social Security Administration for all recipients 
for which such information has not been previously requested. The 30-day 
timeframe specified in Sec. 272.8(g) is effective for applicant 
households which become recipients as discussed in Sec. 272.8(e)(1) as 
soon as a State agency begin receiving information from particular data 
sources.
    (i) A Plan describing good faith efforts shall at a minimum document 
that the State agency is currently in compliance with wage match 
criteria as specified in the final rulemaking of November 5, 1982 (47 FR 
50180), assure that such compliance will continue at current levels 
until such time as these

[[Page 503]]

provisions are implemented, and provide an implementation schedule that 
reflects full compliance in the minimum amount of additional time. 
Requests for delays of implementation beyond May 29, 1986 shall identify 
the applicable regulation part, the date for implementation, 
justification for the delay, and the implementation plan.
    (ii) The Secretary shall consult with the Secretary of the 
Department of Health and Human Services and with the Secretary of the 
Department of Labor prior to the approval of Plans of Operation 
documenting good faith efforts. In no event shall the Secretary approve 
a delay of the provisions of individual notification in Sec. 273.2(f)(9) 
beyond the initial implementation date of any of these new provisions.
    (iii) Implementation schedules beyond September 30, 1986 are not 
approvable, with the following exception: If on April 1, 1985 no SWICA 
exists in a particular State, the provisions of the rule as they relate 
to SWICAs shall be effective upon the designation of a SWICA. 
Implementation of a SWICA after April 1, 1985 shall take place as soon 
thereafter as possible but in no event later than September 30, 1988. 
All SWICAs with delayed implementation shall be in operation so that 
wage information is reported to them starting with the month of October 
1988.
    (71) Amendment No. 266. The provisions contained in Amendment No. 
266 shall be implemented by March 6, 1987.
    (i) All Fiscal Year 1987 review schedules shall continue in force 
despite the implementation of these provisions. However, a State agency 
may, at its option, seek a change in that schedule.
    (ii) Waivers shall remain in force until their expiration. If a 
State agency wishes to cancel a waiver it should contact its Regional 
Office and negotiate whatever change it needs.
    (iii) The first periodic Corrective Action Plan update required by 
this amendment shall be submitted by May 1, 1987.
    (72) Amendment 267. State agencies shall implement the eligibility 
requirements of this rulemaking as they apply to offsetting farm self-
employment losses and publicly operated community mental health centers 
not later than March 27, 1986. State agencies must begin taking 
applications from residents of publicly operated community mental health 
centers (as defined in Sec. 271.2) not later than March 27, 1986. FCS 
field offices may authorize these centers to act as retail food stores 
on February 25, 1986.
    (73) Amendment 269. The correction to Sec. 273.7(n)(1)(v) outlined 
in amendment 269 is effective retroactively to October 3, 1984. State 
agencies which may have implemented the voluntary quit error prior to 
receiving FCS notification not to effectuate the change, shall issue 
lost benefits to affected households, but not prior to November 2, 1984 
(the effective date of the October 3, 1984 final rule). State agencies 
shall implement the revisions to the rules outlined in amendment 269 for 
all new applicants no later than the first day of the month following 
June 26, 1986. Any conversion of the current caseload necessitated by 
this amendment shall be done at recertification or at the time the case 
is next reviewed, whichever occurs first.
    (74) Amendment 270. (i) State agencies shall implement the earned 
income and dependent care deduction amounts and the resource limit 
provisions of Amendment 270 on May 1, 1986. If, for any reason, a State 
agency fails to implement these provisions on that date, households 
shall be provided the lost benefits which they would have received if 
the State agency had implemented these provisions as required.
    (ii) The provisions of Sec. 272.1(b) regarding the prohibiton of 
State or local sales taxes on foods purchased with food stamp coupons 
shall be implemented on October 1 of the calender year during which the 
first regular session of each State's Legislature is convened following 
enactment of Pub. L. 99-198 (enacted December 23, 1985). A ``regular 
session'' means a scheduled session of a State's legislature convened to 
address the usual range of statutory and budgetary issues. A 
``budgetary'' session of a legislature shall be considered a ``regular 
session'' if State rules allow for statutory issues to be introduced at 
these ``budgetary'' sessions even if rules governing these special 
procedures are stringent.
    (A) FCS may approve a delay in the above implementation date if a 
State

[[Page 504]]

provides FCS a request documenting that such date would either:
    (1) Have an adverse and disruptive effect on the administration of 
the Food Stamp Program in such State; or
    (2) would provide inadequate time for retail stores to implement 
required changes in sales tax policy.
    (B) FCS has no authority to approve any State implementation 
schedule with an effective date later than October 1, 1987.
    (75) Amendment 273. The State agency shall implement this amendment 
establishing Alaska urban, Rural I, and Rural II allotment levels by 
April 1, 1986.
    (76) Amendment 274. (i) The provisions of this amendment at 
Secs. 271.2, 273.2, 273.5, 273.9, 273.10(d)(6), and 273.21(b) shall be 
implemented for all new applications and the current caseload no later 
than August 1, 1986. If, for any reason, a State agency fails to 
implement these provisions on this date, households shall be provided 
lost benefits which they would have received if the State agency had 
implemented these provisions as required.
    (ii) The provisions of this amendment at Sec. 273.18 and part 285 
shall be implemented June 20, 1986.
    (iii) The provisions of this amendment at Sec. 273.21(a)(4)(i)(A) 
and the second sentence in Sec. 273.10(f)(7) are effective retroactive 
to August 31, 1981. Section Sec. 273.21(a)(4)(ii)(A) and the first two 
sentences of Sec. 273.21(a)(4)(ii)(B) described in this amendment are 
retroactive to September 8, 1982. The provisions of this amendment at 
Secs. 272.3, 273.21(a), 273.21(a)(3), 273.21(a)(4)(i)(B), the third 
sentence at Sec. 273.10(f)(7), and the last two sentences of 
Sec. 273.21(a)(4)(ii)(B) are effective retroactive to December 2, 1983. 
The provision of this amendment at Sec. 276.7(j) is effective 
retroactive to December 23, 1985.
    (77) Amendment 275. The program change in Sec. 273.2(l) of Amendment 
275 shall be effective October 1, 1986.
    (78) Amendment 276. (i) This rule is effective retroactively to 
December 23, 1985. Any household that applied and was denied benefits 
from that date until implementation of this rule is entitled to restored 
benefits if it:
    (A) Was categorically eligible as defined in this rule;
    (B) Is otherwise entitled to benefits; and
    (C) Requests a review of its case or if the State agency otherwise 
becomes aware that a review is needed.

Restored benefits for these households shall be made available, if 
appropriate, in accordance with Sec. 273.17 back to the date of the food 
stamp application or December 23, 1985, whichever is later. The State 
agency shall implement the changes in this rule immediately upon 
publication and any eligibility determination or issuance made on or 
after that date shall be made in accordance with this rule.
    (ii) For quality control (QC) purposes only, QC reviewers shall not 
identify variances resulting solely from either implementation or 
nonimplementation of this rule in cases with review dates between 
December 23, 1985 and October 31, 1986, inclusive.
    (79) Amendment 277. State agencies shall implement the provisions of 
Amendment 277 on August 22, 1986. If, for any reason, a State agency 
fails to implement the provisions, affected households shall be entitled 
to restored benefits but not prior to August 22, 1986.
    (80) [Reserved]
    (81) Amendment 279. (i) For State agencies which elected to 
implement a $160 dependent care deduction limit for all households prior 
to October 18, 1986, the dependent care deduction provision of Amendment 
No. 279 is effective retroactive to May 1, 1986 in accordance with 
section 638 of Pub. L. 99-500. In such States, for QC purposes only, QC 
reviewers shall not include in the error determination variances which 
resulted from early implementation by these States of the deduction 
limit provided the implementation occurred during the period beginning 
May 1, 1986 through October 1986.
    (ii) For all other State agencies, the $160 dependent care deduction 
provision of Amendment No. 279 shall be implemented for elderly and 
disabled applicant and participating households on December 1, 1986. 
State agencies shall implement the provision as a mass change in 
accordance with

[[Page 505]]

Sec. 273.12(e), except that affected households in Alaska, Hawaii and 
Guam shall be issued an individual notice which, at a minimum, informs 
the households of the general nature of the mass change, the effect of 
the deduction limit on the household's allotment, and the month the 
change will take effect. If for any reason the State agency fails to 
implement the provision on the required date, affected households shall 
be provided restored benefits, back to December 1, 1986. For QC purposes 
only in such States, QC reviewers shall not include in the error 
determination variances which resulted solely from a State agency's 
implementation or nonimplementation of the deduction limit between 
December 1, 1986 and January 1, 1987.
    (82) Amendment 281. State agencies shall implement the provisions of 
this amendment no later than April 1, 1987.
    (83) Amendment 282. The changes to Sec. 273.2(i)(3)(i) contained in 
Amendment No. 282 are effective January 12, 1987 and shall be 
implemented no later than February 11, 1987.
    (84) Amendment 285. (i) The provisions of Amendment No. 285 at 
Secs. 273.9(d)(6)(i), 273.9(d)(6)(ii), 273.9(d)(6)(v)(B), 
273.10(d)(1)(i) and 273.10(d)(6) are retroactively effective to October 
1, 1986. The State agency shall implement the provisions immediately 
upon publication and any eligibility determination made on or after that 
date shall be made in accordance with this rule. The State agency shall 
review a case to determine if the household was denied benefits under 
these amendments whenever the household requests a review or the State 
agency becomes aware that such a denial may have occurred. Any household 
that was denied benefits as a result of an eligibility or benefit 
calculation (e.g., processed change report) made on or after October 1, 
1986 is entitled to restored benefits. Restored benefits for these 
households shall be made available, if approporiate, in accordance with 
Sec. 273.17 back to: (A) October 1, 1986 or the date of application 
whichever is later for new applications; or (B) October 1, 1986 or the 
first month in which the application of these amendments would have 
affected the household's benefits, whichever is later, for certified 
households.
    (ii) For quality control (QC) purposes only, a variance resulting 
solely from either the implementation or non-implementation of this rule 
shall not be identified between October 1, 1986 and April 1, 1987.
    (85) Amendment No. 286. (i) The provisions of Amendment No. 286 
which permit homeless meal providers to apply for authorization to 
accept food stamps were effective March 11, 1987.
    (ii) All other provisions of this amendment were effective April 1, 
1987.
    (86) Amendment No. 287. The provisions of this amendment are 
effective April 7, 1987.
    (87) Amendment No. 288. The removal of the word ``funded'' from the 
last sentence in Sec. 273.11(e)(1), the amendments to the first and 
fourth sentences in Sec. 278.1(e), and the revision of paragraph 
(a)(2)(iii) in Sec. 273.11 are effective February 25, 1986 and shall be 
implemented not later than March 27, 1986.
    (88) Amendment No. 292. (i) The effective date of the provisions of 
this amendment is retroactive to November 6, 1986.
    (ii) The actual dates upon which aliens may become eligible under 
Sec. 273.4(a) (8), (9), (10), and (11) are specified in those 
paragraphs. State agencies must inform their staff of the respective 
dates as they pertain to the eligibility or ineligibility of applicant 
aliens.
    (89) Amendment No. 293. The provisions of Amendment No. 293 are 
effective retroactively to October 17, 1986 and shall be implemented as 
follows:
    (i) State agencies shall implement the provisions of this amendment 
for new applicant households which apply for program benefits on or 
after June 1, 1987.
    (ii) State agencies shall convert their affected current caseload to 
the provisions of this amendment at household request, at 
recertification, or when the case is next reviewed, whichever occurs 
first and provide restored benefits, if appropriate, back to the date of 
application of October 17, 1986, whichever occurred later.
    (iii) Any affected household that applied for Program benefits from 
October 17, 1986 until implementation of

[[Page 506]]

this rule and was denied benefits is entitled to restored benefits back 
to the date of application or October 17, 1986, whichever occurred 
later, if the household:
    (A) Is otherwise entitled to benefits, and
    (B) Requests a review of its case or the State agency otherwise 
becomes aware that review is needed.
    (iv) For quality control (QC) purposes only, QC shall not identify 
variances resulting solely from either implementation or 
nonimplementation of the provisions of this amendment for cases with 
review dates between October 17, 1986 (the date of enactment of Pub. L. 
99-498) and August 31, 1987.
    (90) Amendment No. 294. State agencies shall implement the Title IV-
D child support income exclusion provision of Amendment No. 294 at its 
own option, provided it has procedures in place, at the time of 
implementation, for applying the provision to all affected households 
and for calculating and reimbursing FCS as required under the provision. 
State agencies shall implement the remaining provisions of Amendment No. 
294 retroactively to April 1, 1987. State agencies shall provide 
restored benefits, if appropriate, back to the date of application or 
April 1, 1987, whichever occurred later. Any affected household that 
applied for Program benefits from April 1, 1987 until implementation of 
this rule and was denied benefits is entitled to restored benefits back 
to the date of application or April 1, 1987, whichever occurred later, 
if the household is otherwise entitled to benefits and requests a review 
of its case or the State agency otherwise becomes aware that a review is 
needed. The provision at 7 CFR 273.17, limiting restored benefits to 12 
months, shall not apply to households entitled to resorted benefits 
under the provisions of Amendment No. 294. For QC purposes, 
implementation variances shall not be identified unless a case meets all 
four of the following conditions: the case's review date is after August 
31, 1987; the State agency certified or recertified the case (or was 
required to recertify the case) after August 31, 1987; the certification 
or recertification was effective for the review date (or the required 
recertification should have been effective for the review date); and in 
a retrospective budget system, the household's budget month was 
September 1987 or later or in a prospective budget system, the 
household's issuance month was September 1987 or later. For the purpose 
of this amendment, State agencies shall not establish a claim against 
any household which received overissued benefits resulting solely from 
retroactive implementation of the JTPA income provision in 
Sec. 273.9(b)(1)(v).
    (91) Amendment No. 295--(i) Automated Federal information exchange 
systems. States' QC liability exemption for errors resulting from proper 
use of a Federal automatic information exchange system is effective 
beginning with the Fiscal Year 1986 reporting period.
    (ii) FCS timeframes. The timeframes for notifying States of their 
payment error rates and payment error rate liabilities, if any, and the 
timeframe by which FCS must initiate collection action on claims for 
such liabilities are effective beginning with the Fiscal Year 1986 
reporting period.
    (92) Amendment No. 284. State agencies shall submit their ADP/CIS 
plans to FCS for approval no later than October 1, 1987. Portions of 
ADP/CIS plans may be submitted no later than January 1, 1988. Plans must 
be approvable within 60 days of State agency receipt of FCS comments but 
no later than March 1, 1988. State agencies must begin to implement 
provisions contained in their approved plans by October 1, 1988.
    (93) Amendment No. 298. The provisions of Amendment No. 298 are 
effective, and shall be implemented, as follows:
    (i) The provision in Sec. 271.2 of this amendment which defines 
``General assistance'' and the provisions contained in 
Sec. 273.9(b)(2)(i), Sec. 273.9(c)(1)(ii)(A), (c)(1)(ii)(B), and 
(c)(1)(ii)(C), regarding exclusion of certain PA/GA vendor payments are 
effective retroactively to April 1, 1987. The provision in 
Sec. 273.9(c)(1)(iv)(B), exclusion of emergency/special PA/GA vendor 
payments, is also effective retroactive to April 1, 1987, however, this 
provision reflects current policy and requires no implementation efforts 
by State agencies.

[[Page 507]]

State agencies shall immediately implement the other provisions listed 
above. Affected households shall be entitled to restored benefits back 
to the date of application or April 1, 1987, whichever occured later.
    (ii) The technical amendment to part 277 is effective September 29, 
1987, and does not require implementation efforts by State agencies. The 
remaining provisions of Amendment No. 298 are effective, and must be 
implemented, as follows:
    (A) Section 271.2, definition of ``Homeless individual,'' effective 
July 22, 1987. State agencies shall immediately inform caseworkers of 
the new definition. No other implementation efforts are required to the 
State agencies.
    (B) Section 273.9(c)(1)(ii)(D), the income exclusion of certain PA/
GA vendor payments, is effective and shall be implemented for new 
applicant households which apply for benefits during the period 
beginning October 20, 1987 and ending September 30, 1989. This provision 
does not apply to allotments issued to any household for any month 
beginning before the effective period of the provision. State agencies 
shall convert their affected current caseload to this provision, if 
otherwise eligible, at recertification, when the household requests a 
review of its case, or when the State agency otherwise becomes aware 
that a review is needed but not prior to October 20, 1987.
    (C) Section 272.5, the financial reimbursement for Program 
informational activities for the homeless, is effective July 22, 1987.
    (D) Section 273.1(a)(2)(i)(C), Sec. 273.1(a)(2)(i)(D), 
Sec. 273.10(f)(2), the exception to certain household composition 
requirements, and the rule regarding recertification of households 
subject to the exception, are effective and must be implemented on 
October 1, 1987. Households which apply for benefits on or after October 
1, 1987 may be granted separate household status under this provision. 
Current participants which may be eligible for separate household status 
under this provision, may be granted separate status, but not prior to 
October 1, 1987, if the household requests separate status and the State 
agency determines that the household meets the requirements of this 
provision.
    (E) Section 273.2(i), the expansion of expedited service, is 
effective, and must be implemented, for affected households applying for 
Program benefits on or after December 1, 1987.
    (F) Section 273.9(a)(3), regarding the date of making the annual 
adjustment to the income standards, is effective with the 1988 annual 
adjustment. The July 1, 1987 income limits will remain in effect until 
October 1, 1988.
    (G) The first three sentences of Sec. 273.9(d)(8)(i), the raising of 
the shelter deduction limit for the 48 States and DC., Alaska, Hawaii, 
Guam and Virgin Islands, are effective October 1, 1987. State agencies 
shall implement the higher deduction limits appearing in the first 
sentence of Sec. 273.9(d)(8)(i) on October 1, 1987 only for households 
whose certification periods begin on or after October 1, 1987. State 
agencies shall implement the lower deduction limits appearing in the 
second sentence of Sec. 273.9(d)(8)(i) on October 1, 1987 only for 
households whose certification periods begin before October 1, 1987. The 
State agency shall implement the higher deduction limits for households 
whose certification periods begin before October 1, 1987 beginning with 
the month in which such household is recertified after October 1, 1987.
    (H) Section 273.9(d)(7)(i), the change in the standard deduction 
methodology, is effective October 1, 1987.
    (I) The last sentence of Sec. 273.9(d)(8)(i), the change in the 
excess shelter deduction methodology, is effective, October 1, 1988.
    (J) Section 273.18(c)(2)(ii), the earned income deduction penalty, 
is effective on September 5, 1987. State agencies which issue on a 
calendar month basis, shall apply this provision to allotments issued 
for October 1987 and all allotments for subsequent months. State 
agencies which issue on other than a calendar month basis shall apply 
the provision to the issuance for the first issuance month beginning 
after September 5, 1987.
    (iii) State agencies must implement the provisions as outlined in 
paragraph (g)(93)(ii) of this section on the specific dates required for 
each provision. If, for any reason, the State agency fails

[[Page 508]]

to implement the provisions on the required date, affected households, 
if appropriate, shall be entitled to restored benefits back to the date 
of application or the effective date of the provision involved, 
whichever occurred later.
    (iv) Quality control variance exclusion.
    (A) For QC purposes only, QC reviewers shall not identify variances 
resulting solely from implementation or nonimplementation of the 
following provisions in cases with review dates during the periods 
indicated:
    (1) Sections 273.9(b)(2)(i), 273.9(c)(1) (ii)(A), 
273.9(c)(1)(ii)(B), 273.9(c)(1)(ii)(C) and 273.9(c)(1)(iv)(B), 
concerning PA/GA vendor payments, from April 1, 1987 to December 31, 
1987;
    (2) Section 271.2, concerning the definition of ``Homeless 
individual'', from July 22, 1987 to December 31, 1987;
    (3) Section 273.9(c)(1)(ii)(D), concerning PA/GA vendor payments for 
certain housing assistance provided on behalf of households residing in 
temporary housing, from October 20, 1987 to December 31, 1987;
    (4) Sections 273.1(a)(2)(i) (C) and (D), concerning household 
composition, from October 1, 1987 to December 31, 1987;
    (5) Section 273.2(i), concerning entitlement to expedited service, 
from December 1, 1987 to December 31, 1987;
    (6) Section 273.9(d)(8)(i), the first three sentences only, 
concerning the shelter deduction limit, from October 1, 1987 to December 
31, 1987.
    (B) State agencies may choose to exclude these variances in Federal 
subsample reviews; State agencies are not required to do so. To exclude 
the variances, they shall provide FCS with the following information by 
April 1, 1994: The review number of each affected Federal subsample 
review, the sample month, the reason and justification for excluding the 
variance, and the revised finding.
    (94) Amendment No. 299. The changes to Sec. 273.2(i)(3)(ii) are 
effective January 12, 1987 and shall be implemented no later than 
February 11, 1987.
    (95) Amendment No. 268. The QC arbitration provisions shall be 
implemented by State agencies on February 22, 1988, for all cases for 
which the regional case findings or the regional arbitrator's decision 
are received on or after February 22, 1988.
    (96) Amendment 301. This rule pertains to the Income and Eligibility 
Verification System (IEVS). It is effective March 18, 1988, except for 
paragraphs 272.8(i) (3) and (4) and 272.8(j)(1) which will be effective 
upon publication in the Federal Register of the approval of the 
information collection burden by the Office of Management and Budget 
(OMB).
    (97) Amendment No. 278. State agencies shall implement the 
provisions of this amendment no later than October 18, 1988.
    (98) Amendment No. 303. The income exclusion provision Sec. 273.9(c) 
of Amendment No. 303 shall be implemented immediately upon publication 
of the Amendment as follows:
    (i) State agencies must apply the provision of this amendment for 
any eligibility or benefit calculation made on or after February 1, 
1988.
    (ii) Affected households which were denied benefits because the 
household's eligibility or benefit calculation during the second Federal 
fiscal year quarter of 1988 (but not prior to February 1, 1988) did not 
include the income exclusion provision of this amendment shall be 
entitled to restored benefits at the time of recertification, whenever 
the household requests a review of its case, or when the State agency 
otherwise becomes aware that a review of a particular case is needed.
    (iii) Benefits shall be restored back to February 1, 1988 or the 
date of the food stamp application, whichever occured later. Restoration 
shall be made in accordance with Sec. 273.17 except that the twelve-
month limit for restoring benefits shall not apply.
    (iv) For Quality Control (QC) purposes only, QC reviewers shall not 
identify variances resulting solely from implementation or 
nonimplementation of Amendment No. 303 for cases with review dates 
between February 1, 1988 and August 31, 1988. For retrospectively 
budgeted cases, QC reviewers shall begin identifying variances when 
September becomes the budget month. Variances shall not be identified in 
cases where Amendment No. 303 was not implemented prior to the QC review

[[Page 509]]

when the State agency correctly followed the implementation provisions 
of this section.
    (99) [Reserved]
    (100) Amendment 289.
    (i) This rule is effective August 11, 1988.
    (ii) State agency Work Plans setting forth proposals for conducting 
Simplified Application/Standardized Benefit Projects must be postmarked 
no later than November 9, 1988. Local agency Work Plans must be 
postmarked no later than December 9, 1988.
    (101) Amendment No. 291. The provisions of Amendment No. 291 are 
effective September 19, 1988.
    (102) Amendment No. 307. The provisions of this amendment are 
effective immediately and shall be implemented as follows:
    (i) No later than October 1, 1988 for all new applicants, and no 
later than the first recertification on or after October 1, 1988 for the 
participating caseload, State agencies shall implement the provisions of 
Sec. 272.2(b) relating to the alien/citizenship statement and 
notification of verification with INS; the provisions of Sec. 273.1(b) 
relating to nonhousehold members; the provisions of Sec. 273.2(f)(1)(ii) 
relating to the mandatory verification of alien status; the provisions 
of Sec. 273.2(h)(3) relating to delays in application processing; and 
the provisions of Sec. 272.11(c) relating to the treatment of income and 
resources of nonhousehold members; and
    (ii) Unless a waiver has been approved by FCS by October 1, 1988, 
State agencies shall implement all other provisions of this rule no 
later than October 1, 1988. Implementation by October 1, 1988 shall be 
accomplished either by obtaining FCS approval to a Plan of Operation as 
required in the rule at Sec. 272.11(e) or by submitting to FCS a 
substantially approvable Plan of Operation as described in material 
which FCS Regional Offices provided State agencies on or about September 
2, 1988. That material provided points for State agencies to consider 
relative to requesting waivers. State agencies should contact FCS 
Regional Offices if they need further guidance on waivers.
    (103) Amendment No. 308. The quality control changes to 
Sec. 275.12(d)(2) shall be implemented for the quality control review 
period beginning October 1, 1988.
    (104) Amendment No. 300. State agencies shall implement the 
requirements of this rulemaking no later than May 1, 1989.
    (105) Amendment No. 271. This rule becomes effective April 1, 1989, 
and the State agencies shall implement all provisions on that date, with 
the exception of the following provisions: the new provisions on 
replacement issuances shall be implemented by October 1, 1989; the new 
liabilities for State agencies using authorization document issuance 
systems shall be implemented on October 1, 1989; the new mail issuance 
reporting and liability assessments shall be implemented on October 1, 
1989; State agencies wanting to change their current unit-level of mail 
issuance loss reporting must submit their initial plans by May 15, 1989; 
the new provision on quality control case reviews shall be implemented 
for federal Fiscal Year 1990; State agencies shall begin to use the 
revised Form FCS-46, Issuance Reconciliation Report, to report figures 
for the month of October 1989; and, provisions pertaining to staggered 
issuance contained in any currently-approved waivers will automatically 
be cancelled April 1, 1989.
    (106) Amendment No. 310. (i) The provisions of this amendment which 
adopt, as final, interim provisions published July 17, 1987 and those 
which redesignate or otherwise slightly modify the July 17 interim 
provisions for clarity only are effective retroactively to April 1, 
1987. The conforming amendment at Sec. 273.11(e)(7) is effective 
retroactively to February 25, 1986. The remaining technical amendments 
contained in this amendment at Sec. 273.2(e)(2), Sec. 273.7(b)(1)(vii), 
Sec. 273.9(b)(1)(iii), Sec. 276.2(d) and Sec. 278.1(e) are effective 
April 24, 1989. These provisions do not alter or change current policy 
or procedures under which State agency are operating or do not require 
special implementation efforts by State agencies.
    (ii) The provision in Sec. 273.9(b)(1)(v) which limits application 
of the provision to on-the-job training programs under section 204(5), 
Title II, of the Job Training Partnership Act is effective

[[Page 510]]

retroactively to April 1, 1987 and shall be implemented as follows:
    (A) State agencies shall implement the provision for all new 
applicant households no later than June 1, 1989. Affected applicant 
households which applied for Program benefits during the period April 1, 
1987 and the date the State agency implemented this change and were 
denied benefits shall be provided restored benefits, if applicable, back 
to April 1, 1987 or the date of the food stamp application, whichever 
occurs later, if the household is otherwise entitled to benefits and 
requests a review of its case or the State agency otherwise becomes 
aware that a review is needed.
    (B) All other households shall be converted to the provision at 
household request, at recertification, or when the case is next 
reviewed, whichever occurs first. Restored benefits shall be provided, 
if applicable, for such households back to April 1, 1987 or the date of 
the food stamp application, whichever occurs later.
    (C) The provision at 7 CFR 273.17, limiting restored benefits to 12 
months, does not apply for households entitled to restored benefits 
under Amendment No. 310.
    (107) Amendment No. 313. The performance-based funding provisions 
for Employment and Training programs shall be effective October 1, 1989.
    (108) Amendment No. 314. (i) The provision of Amendment No. 314 
which adds five sentences to Sec. 273.2(j)(1)(iv) and the provisions 
which add a new paragraph Sec. 273.2(j)(2)(iii)(B) and amend 
Secs. 273.17 and 273.18 are effective July 7, 1989 and shall be 
implemented no later than September 1, 1989.
    (ii) All remaining provisions of Amendment No. 314, which adopt the 
interim provisions of August 5, 1986 as final without change or modify 
the interim provisions for clarity only, are effective retroactively to 
December 23, 1985 (the effective date of the interim rulemaking). These 
provision do not reflect a change in intended policy and, therefore, do 
not require special implementation efforts by State agencies.
    (109) Amendment No. 315. Program changes required by Amendment No. 
315 to the food stamp regulations shall be implemented as follows:
    (i) The provisions relating to migrant and seasonal farmworkers (7 
CFR 273.9(c)(1)(ii)(E) and 273.10(a)(1)(ii)) are effective September 1, 
1988 for all households applying or certified subsequent to August 31, 
1988. Changes affecting currently participating households are to be 
implemented at recertification or when it is necessary to implement 
other changes affecting the household.
    (ii) State agencies were required to implement the provision of this 
rule regarding a technical correction concerning energy assistance 
payments (7 CFR 273.9(c)(11)) on September 19, 1988.
    (iii) State agencies were required to implement revised food stamp 
allotments on October 1, 1988 (7 CFR 271.2, 271.7, 273.10(e)(2), 
273.10(e)(4)(ii), and 273.12(e)). Revised allotments were implemented as 
mass changes in accordance with 7 CFR 273.12(e).
    (iv) State agencies were required to implement the provision 
relating to the dependent care deduction, 7 CFR 273.9(d)(4), 
273.10(d)(1)(i), and 273.10(e)(1)(i)(E), and monthly reporting and 
retrospective budgeting, 7 CFR 273.21(a) and (b), on October 1, 1988. 
These provisions were immediately effective for all households certified 
subsequent to September 30, 1988. Changes affecting currently 
participating households were to be implemented upon recertification, at 
the household's request, or when it was necessary to implement other 
changes affecting the household. (For example, a change reported by a 
nonmonthly reporting retrospectively budgeted household was to be 
implemented in accordance with 7 CFR 273.12.) The Department was not 
requiring State agencies to conduct a casefile review to implement 
monthly reporting and retrospective budgeting changes for currently 
participating households. Monthly reports submitted by households which 
became exempt from MRRB as a result of the Hunger Prevention Act, such 
as non-migrant seasonal farmworkers or the homeless, were to be treated 
as change reports and processed prospectively in accordance with 7 CFR 
273.12(c).
    (v) State agencies were required to implement the provisions of this 
rule concerning the exclusion of advance payment of earned income tax 
credits,

[[Page 511]]

7 CFR 273.8(c)(1) and 273.9(c)(14), on January 1, 1989. Households 
applying subsequent to December 31, 1988 should have had this provision 
applied to them as of their date of application. Changes affecting 
households participating as of December 31, 1988 were to be implemented 
upon recertification, at the household's request, or when it was 
necessary to implement other changes affecting the household.
    (vi) All other provisions of this rule, relating to technical 
corrections concerning the urban Alaska TFP (7 CFR 272.7(c)), Alaska 
proration (7 CFR 272.7(f)(3)(iii)), and the dependent care deduction (7 
CFR 273.11(c)(2)(iii) and 273.12(e)(1)(i)(C)), are to be implemented 
August 1, 1989.
    (vii) Quality control errors made as a result of this rule's changes 
to Secs. 273.9, 273.10, and 273.21 during the required implementation 
time frame established by this rulemaking shall be handled in accordance 
with interim regulations published at 53 FR 44171, dated November 2, 
1988. Food stamp allotment changes are not covered by the interim 
regulation because this is a mass change.
    (viii) State agencies which failed to implement any of these 
provisions by the required dates shall provide affected households with 
the lost benefits they would have received if the State agency had 
implemented these provisions as required.
    (110) Amendment No. 316. State welfare agencies shall implement the 
provisions of Amendment No. 316 as follows:
    (i) The provisions contained in Sec. 274.2(b) of Amendment No. 316 
are effective retroactively to January 1, 1989 and shall be implemented 
by State welfare agencies no later than January 1, 1990 for all 
households which newly apply for Program benefits or apply for 
recertification on or after that date.
    (ii) The remaining provisions are effective July 1, 1989 and must be 
implemented on that date for all households which newly apply for 
Program benefits or apply for recertification on or after that date. The 
current caseload shall be converted to these provisions at household 
request, at the time of recertification, or when the case is next 
reviewed, whichever occurs first and restored benefits shall be 
provided, if appropriate, back to July 1, 1989 or the date of the 
application, whichever is later. Additionally, households which applied 
for Program benefits between July 1, 1989 and the date the State agency 
implemented these provisions, and were denied benefits, shall be 
entitled to restored benefits back to July 1, 1989 or the date of the 
application, whichever occurred later, if the household:
    (A) Is otherwise entitled to benefits, and
    (B) Requests a review of its case or the State agency otherwise 
becomes aware that a review is needed.
    (111) Amendment No. 296. The provisions of Amendment 296 are 
effective July 5, 1989.
    (112) Amendment No. 309. (i) The State agency shall have until June 
18, 1990, to request regional arbitration of regional office case 
findings which the State received before February 22, 1988.
    (ii) The State agency shall have until June 18, 1990, to request 
national office arbitration of regional arbitration decisions which the 
State agency received before February 22, 1988.
    (113) Amendment (320). (i) The provisions of this rule are effective 
April 2, 1990.
    (ii) The provisions relating to the Expanded Food and Nutrition 
Education Program (Sec. 272.5(b)(1)(iv)), the collection of fraud claims 
Sec. 273.18, the monitoring of claims against households 
(Sec. 273.18(k)(5)), adverse action notice on claim demand letters 
(Sec. 273.18(d)(3)), notices of fair hearings (Sec. 273.18(d)(3)), and 
the results of geographic error prone profiles (Sec. 275.15(g)) shall be 
implemented no later than July 2, 1990. The provision relating to fraud 
detection units (Sec. 272.4(h)) shall be implemented no later than 
September 4, 1990. State agencies shall complete the first review of 
food stamp office hours (Sec. 272.4(g)) during Federal Fiscal Year 1990.
    (iii) State agencies may submit attachments to their Plans of 
Operation pertaining to the intercept of unemployment compensation 
benefits to repay intentional Program violations claims as specified in 
Sec. 272.2 (a) and (d) and Sec. 272.12(a) of this amendment as of 
February 22, 1990.

[[Page 512]]

    (114) Amendment No. 322. The changes contained in this amendment are 
effective October 15, 1990 and shall be implemented no later than that 
date. The changes to 7 CFR 273.11 contained in this amendment will apply 
only to disqualifications imposed after the effective date of this 
rulemaking.
    (115) Amendment No. 324. The quality control changes to Sec. 275.12 
that are made by Amendment No. 324 shall be implemented for the quality 
control review period beginning January 1, 1991.
    (116) Amendment No. 330. The provisions of Amendment No. 330 are 
effective and must be implemented on August 1, 1991. Any variance 
resulting from implementation of the provisions of this amendment shall 
be excluded from error analysis for 90 days from this required 
implementation date in accordance with 7 CFR 275.12(d)(2)(vii). The 
provisions must be implemented for all households that newly apply for 
Program benefits on or after the required implementation date. The 
current caseload shall be converted to these provisions at household 
request, at the time of recertification, or when the case is next 
reviewed, whichever occurs first, and the State agency must provide 
restored benefits back to the required implemention date. If for any 
reason a State agency fails to implement on the required implementation 
date, restored benefits shall be provided, if appropriate, back to the 
required implementation date or the date of application, whichever is 
later.
    (117) Amendment No. 332. The provision of Amendment No. 332 
regarding the resource exemption for PA and SSI recipients is effective 
and must be implemented no later than February 1, 1992. Any variances 
resulting from implementation of the provisions of this amendment shall 
be excluded from error analysis for 90 days from this required 
implementation date, in accordance with 7 CFR 275.12(d)(2)(vii). The 
provision must be implemented for all households that newly applied for 
Program benefits on or after the required implementation date. The 
current caseload shall be converted to these provisions at household 
request, at the time of recertification, or when the case is next 
reviewed, whichever occurs first, and the State agency must provide 
restored benefits back to the required implementation date. If for any 
reason a State agency fails to implement on the required implementation 
date, restored benefits shall be provided, if appropriate, back to the 
required implementation date or the date of application whichever is 
later.
    (118) Amendment No. 321. (i) The provisions contained in 
Sec. 273.7(d)(1)(ii)(A) and 273.9(c)(5)(i) (A) and (F) of Amendment No. 
321, which implement section 404(c) of the Hunger Prevention Act of 
1988, are effective and must be implemented retroactively to July 1, 
1989.
    (ii) The remaining provisions of Amendment No. 321 are effective 
October 1, 1988 and must be implemented no later than March 1, 1992. 
State agencies may implement the conciliation procedure provisions 
contained in Sec. 273.7(g)(1)(ii) immediately upon publication of 
Amendment No. 321. However, in no case shall the conciliation procedures 
be implemented any later than March 1, 1992. By implemented, the 
Department means that the State agency shall begin to use conciliation 
procedures in all cases where the State agency has determined on or 
after the above implementation date that an individual has refused or 
failed to comply with an E&T requirement under Sec. 273.7(f).
    (119) Amendment No. 328. (i) The requirements for State agencies to 
begin implementation or corrective action for deficiencies which are the 
cause for non-entitlement to enhanced funding for the Fiscal Year 1986 
review period, and review periods thereafter were effective as of 
October 1, 1985, pursuant to section 604 of Public Law 100-435.
    (ii) The requirements for State agencies to begin the implementation 
of corrective action for deficiencies which result in underissuances, 
improper denials or improper terminations of benefits to eligible 
households where such errors are caused by State agency rules, practices 
or procedures were effective July 1, 1989, pursuant to section 320 of 
Public Law 100-435. The corrective action must address all such 
deficiencies which occurred on or after July 1, 1989.
    (iii) The State agency shall have until December 27, 1991, to 
implement changes in the development of quality

[[Page 513]]

control sampling plans, such that only those State agencies proposing 
non-proportional integrated, or other alternative sampling plan designs 
must:
    (A) Demonstrate that the alternative design provides payment error 
rate estimates with equal-or-better predicted precision than would be 
obtained had the State agency reviewed simple random samples of the 
sizes specified in Sec. 275.11(b)(1) of the regulations,
    (B) Describe all weighting, and estimation procedures if the sample 
design is non-self-weighted, or uses a sampling technique other than 
systematic sampling,
    (C) Demonstrate that self-weighting is actually achieved in sample 
designs claimed to be self-weighting.
    (iv) The State agency shall have until January 27, 1992, to request 
regional arbitration of any federally subsampled underissuance cases for 
which the State agency received FCS regional office QC findings on or 
after February 22, 1988.
    (v) The State agency shall have until January 27, 1992, to request 
national arbitration of any regional arbitration decisions involving 
underissuance cases for which the State agency received FCS regional 
arbitration findings on or after February 22, 1988.
    (120) Amendment No. 335. The provisions contained in Amendment No. 
335 are effective and shall be implemented as follows:
    (i) The provisions contained in Secs. 271.2, 271.7, 
273.1(e)(1)(iii), 273.2(k)(1)(i)(H), 273.2(m), 273.10, 273.18 and 278.1 
of Amendment No. 335 are effective on February 1, 1992 and shall be 
implemented on that date as follows:
    (A) The Guam and Virgin Islands State agencies shall communicate the 
two new group home provisions (Secs. 271.2, 273.1(e)(1)(iii) and 278.1) 
to group homes in their areas by this date so that they can apply for 
the appropriate certification and residents can apply for food stamps 
without delay. All State agencies shall implement the expanded group 
home provisions for applicants newly applying for program benefits on or 
after February 1, 1992 for approved group homes.
    (B) No special implementation efforts are required with regard to 
the provisions in Secs. 273.2(k)(1)(i)(H) and 273.2(m) about informing 
SSI applicants about the Food Stamp Program and the availability of an 
application at the social security office.
    (C) State agencies are not required to adjust their computers or 
train their caseworkers immediately in order to implement the provisions 
in Secs. 271.2, 271.7, 273.10 and 273.18 relative to the minimum benefit 
for one- and two-person households because the methodology for annually 
adjusting the minimum benefit will not result in an increase in the 
minimum benefit for some time. However, State agencies are expected to 
have the capability of implementing a change in the minimum benefit in a 
timely manner when such a change in announced and, therefore, shall not 
wait until an actual change in the minimum benefit to adjust computers 
and train caseworkers.
    (ii) The remaining provisions of Amendment No. 335 are effective 
February 1, 1992. The provisions which reflect that a joint application 
is no longer required for SSI applicants Secs. 273.2 (c)(1), 
273.2(i)(3)(i), and 273.2(k)(1)(i)(D) do not require implementation 
efforts by State agencies. The remaining provisions (Secs. 273.4, 
273.9(b) and 273.9(c)) also do not require special implementation 
efforts by State agencies as the provisions reflect current policy.
    (iii) Any variance resulting from implementation of the provisions 
of this amendment shall be excluded from quality control error analysis 
for 90 days from the required implementation date which shall be handled 
in accordance with 7 CFR 275.12(d)(2)(vii).
    (121) Amendment No. 336. The provisions of Amendment No. 336 are 
effective and must be implemented as follows:
    (i) The provision that gives State agencies the option of using 
retrospective budgeting for nonmonthly reporting households other than 
those exempt from monthly reports (7 CFR 273.21(b) introductory text) 
was effective as of November 28, 1990, the date of enactment of the 
Leland Act.
    (ii) The delegation of the responsibility for design of the monthly 
report form (Sec. 273.21(h)(3) and Sec. 273.21(j)(1)(ii) of this 
chapter) must be implemented by February 1, 1992.

[[Page 514]]

    (iii) The remaining provisions are effective January 3, 1992 and 
must be implemented by July 1, 1992.
    (iv) Any variances resulting from implementation of the provisions 
of this amendment shall be excluded from error analysis for 90 days from 
the required implementation dates in accordance with 7 CFR 
275.12(d)(2)(vii).
    (122) Amendment No. 337. The provisions of Amendment No. 337 are 
effective and must be implemented as follows:
    (i) State agencies shall implement the provisions of Amendment No. 
337 on February 1, 1992, except as provided in paragraph (g)(122)(ii) of 
this section.
    (ii) The amendments to revise the introductory text of Sec. 273.2(j) 
and Sec. 273.2(j)(3) as they relate to categorical eligibility and the 
amendment adding Sec. 273.2(j)(4) are effective and must be implemented 
February 1, 1992 for recipients of GA from a State program. They are 
effective and must be implemented August 1, 1992 for recipients of GA 
from a local program.
    (iii) Any variance resulting from implementation of the provisions 
of this amendment shall be excluded from error analysis in accordance 
with 7 CFR 275.12(d)(2)(vii) for 90 days from the required 
implementation date. The provisions must be implemented for all 
households that newly apply for Program benefits on or after the 
required implementation date. If for any reason a State agency fails to 
implement on the required implementation date, restored benefits shall 
be provided, if appropriate, back to the required implementation date, 
the date of the food stamp application or the date the household was 
determined categorically eligible in accordance with Sec. 273.2(j)(4), 
whichever is later.
    (iv) The current caseload shall be converted to these provisions at 
household request, at the time of recertification, or when the case is 
next reviewed, whichever occurs first. The State agency must provide 
restored benefits back to the required implementation date.
    (123) Amendment No. 338. The provisions of Amendment No. 338 are 
effective and must be implemented on February 1, 1992. The provisions 
must be implemented for all households that newly apply for Program 
benefits on or after the required implementation date of February 1, 
1992. The current caseload shall be converted to these provisions at 
household request, at the time of recertification, or when the case is 
next reviewed, whichever occurs first. If, for any reason, a State 
agency fails to implement by the required implementation date, restored 
benefits shall be provided, if appropriate, back to the required 
implementation date or the date of the food stamp application, whichever 
is later. Any variances resulting from implementation of the provisions 
of this amendment shall be excluded from error analysis for 90 days from 
this required implementation date in accordance with 7 CFR 
275.12(d)(2)(vii).
    (124) Amendment No. 325. The quality control changes to Sec. 275.23 
that are made by Amendment No. 325 shall be implemented effective 
January 24, 1992.
    (125) Amendment No. 345. The provisions of Amendment No. 345 are 
effective on April 1, 1992, and shall be implemented as follows:
    (i) Currently operating demonstration projects shall submit to FCS 
for approval a plan no later than June 30, 1992, to satisfy the 
requirements of this regulation. The plan shall address the areas in 
which the State EBT demonstration project does not comply with the 
provisions of this rule and how the State agency plans to bring its 
system into compliance. The State agency shall submit a schedule of any 
actions it proposes to take and when they are to be completed. 
Compliance with the provisions of this final regulation shall occur 
within two years from the effective date unless approved by FCS to 
continue operations under the authority of section 17 of the Act (7 
U.S.C. 2026) as a demonstration project. In seeking FCS approval to 
continue under Section 17 authority, the State agency shall state what 
research value would be obtained in continuing the demonstration.
    (ii) For State agencies that have proposals or planning documents 
currently under review by the Department, the State agencies and the 
Department shall establish at what point the State agency is in the 
planning process and how the State agency will fit into the approval 
process of these

[[Page 515]]

rules. All such State agencies will be expected to comply with the 
standards of these rules.
    (iii) A State agency that wishes to obtain approval for an EBT 
system shall submit a Planning Advanced Planning Document for FCS 
approval as prescribed herein.
    (126) Amendment No. 327. (i) The statutory provision reflected in 
Sec. 275.23(e)(6)(v) of Amendment No. 327 was effective October 1, 1985 
pursuant to Public Law 100-435.
    (ii) The remaining provisions are effective October 28, 1992.
    (127) Amendment No. 340. (i) The provisions at 
Sec. 273.7(d)(1)(i)(A) and Sec. 273.7(d)(1)(i)(B) are effective 
retroactive to October 1, 1991.
    (ii) The provision at Sec. 273.7(c)(4)(viii) is effective and must 
be implemented by August 15, 1993, the date E&T plans must be submitted 
to FCS.
    (iii) The provision at Sec. 273.10(d)(1)(i) is effective January 19, 
1993 and must be implemented by March 1, 1993.
    (iv) The remaining provisions of Amendment No. 340 are effective and 
must be implemented retroactively to February 1, 1992.
    (v) Any variances resulting from implementation of the provision at 
Sec. 273.10(d)(1)(i) shall be excluded from error analysis for 90 days 
from the required implementation date in accordance with 7 CFR 
273.12(d)(2)(vii).
    (128)  Amendment No. 326. The provisions of this amendment are 
effective and must be implemented no later than December 1, 1993. Any 
variance resulting from implementation of the provisions of this 
amendment shall be excluded from quality control error analysis for 60 
days from the required implementation date which shall be handled in 
accordance with 7 CFR 275.12(d)(2)(vii).
    (129) Amendment No. 349. The provisions of Amendment No. 349 are 
effective, and shall be implemented, as follows:
    (i) Sec. 273.1(a)(2)(i)(C), Sec. 273.1(a)(2)(i)(D) and 
Sec. 273.10(f)(2) are effective as of October 1, 1987; Sec. 273.2(i)(1) 
(iii) and (iv) are effective as of December 1, 1987; the new 
Sec. 273.9(c)(1)(ii)(G) is effective as of April 1, 1987. However, 
application of Sec. 273.9(c)(1)(ii)G) in conjunction with the provisions 
at Sec. 273.9 (c)(1)(ii) (A) through (F) and (c)(5)(i)(F) is effective 
as of the date the individual provisions at 7 CFR 273.9 (c)(1)(ii) (A) 
through (F) and (c)(5)(i)(F) became effective. Those dates are: 
Sec. 273.9(c)(1)(ii) (A), (B), and (C), April 1, 1987; 
Sec. 273.9(c)(1)(ii)(D), October 20, 1987; Sec. 273.9(c)(1)(ii)(E), 
September 1, 1988, and Sec. 273.9(c)(1)(ii)(F), August 1, 1991. The 
amendment to the first sentence of Sec. 273.9(c)(1)(iv)(B) to include a 
regulatory reference to 7 CFR 273.9(c)(5)(i)(F) is effective as of 
August 1, 1991 (the date the individual provision at 7 CFR 
273.9(c)(5)(i)(F) became effective), and Sec. 273.18(c)(2)(ii) is 
effective as of September 5, 1987. To the extent that these provisions 
represent new or different policy from that under which the State agency 
is currently operating, the State agency shall implement the provisions 
not later than April 1, 1994 for households newly applying for Program 
benefits on or after such implementation date. State agencies shall 
convert their affected current caseload to these provisions (except for 
Sec. 273.18(c)(2)(ii)) at recertification, when the household requests a 
review of its case, or when the State agency otherwise becomes aware 
that a review is needed, whichever occurs first. To the extent that the 
provisions will result in restored benefits for affected households, 
such benefits shall be provided back to the effective date of the 
provision or the date of the household's first initial application, 
whichever occurs later;
    (ii) The remaining provisions of Amendment No. 349 adopt as final, 
without change, interim provisions published September 29, 1987 and are 
effective as of the date the corresponding interim provision became 
effective as established at 7 CFR 272.1(g)(93). These provisions and the 
effective dates are: Sec. 271.2, definition of ``Homeless individual,'' 
July 22, 1987; Sec. 272.5, July 22, 1987; Sec. 273.9(a)(3), October 1, 
1988; Sec. 271.2, definition of ``General assistance,'' April 1, 1987; 
Sec. 273.9(b)(2)(i), April 1, 1987; Sec. 273.9(c)(1) (ii)(A), (ii)(B) 
and (ii)(C), April 1, 1987; Sec. 273.9(d)(7)(i), October 1, 1987; 
Sec. 273.9(d)(8)(i), October 1, 1987 (except for the last sentence, 
which is effective October 1, 1988). The provisions do not change policy 
or procedures under which State agencies are currently operating and, 
therefore, do not

[[Page 516]]

require specific implementation efforts by State agencies.
    (130) Amendment No. 342. The provision relating to household 
election of repayment method for IPV claims at Sec. 273.18(d)(4)(ii) is 
effective retroactive to November 28, 1990. The provision relating to 
household election of repayment method for IHE claims at 
Sec. 273.18(d)(4)(i) is effective December 13, 1991. The provisions for 
State agency retention rates on claim collections at Sec. 273.18(h)(2) 
and (i) are effective retroactive to October 1, 1990. The provisions at 
Sec. 277.18 which reduce the enhanced funding level for ADP is effective 
October 1, 1991, for costs incurred on that date and thereafter and does 
not apply to ADP funding approved prior to November 28, 1990.
    (131) Amendment No. 347. The provisions of this amendment are 
effective as specified in paragraphs (g)(131)(ii) (A), (B), and (C) of 
this section. State agencies are not required to do file searches for 
cases relating to PASS households unless the question on an income 
exclusion for PASS had been raised with the State agency prior to 
December 13, 1991.
    (i) The provisions at Sec. 271.2, Sec. 273.1, and Sec. 273.11 were 
effective and had to be implemented no later than February 1, 1992.
    (ii) The provision at Sec. 273.9(c)(17) is effective the earlier of:
    (A) December 13, 1991, the date of enactment of Pub. L. 102-237;
    (B) October 1, 1990, for food stamp households for which the State 
agency knew, or had notice, that a household member had a PASS; or
    (C) Beginning on the date that a fair hearing was requested 
contesting the denial of an income exclusion for amounts provided for a 
PASS.
    (132) Amendment No. 316. The provisions of this final rule that 
amend 7 CFR 273.2(b)(3), 273.2(c)(5), 273.2(f)(8)(i)(A) and (ii), and 
paragraph (11) of the ``Elderly or disabled member'' definition in 7 CFR 
271.2 are effective as of May 6, 1994. The State agency shall implement 
the provisions not later than September 5, 1994 for all households newly 
applying for Program benefits on or after such implementation date. The 
current caseload shall be converted to these provisions at household 
request, at the time of recertification, or when the case is next 
reviewed, whichever occurs first, and the State agency must provide 
restored benefits back to the required implementation date. If for any 
reason a State agency fails to implement on the required implementation 
date, restored benefits shall be provided, if appropriate, back to the 
required implementation date or the date of application whichever is 
later. Any variances resulting from implementation of the provisions of 
this amendment shall be excluded from error analysis for 90 days from 
this required implementation date in accordance with 7 CFR 
275.12(d)(2)(vii).
    (133) Amendment No. 352. The provisions of this amendment are 
effective April 11, 1994.
    (134) Amendment No. 355. The provisions of Amendment No. 355 are 
effective and must be implemented on August 1, 1994. Any variance 
resulting from implementation of the provisions of this amendment shall 
be excluded from error analysis for 120 days from this required 
implementation date in accordance with 7 CFR 275.12(d)(2)(vii) as 
modified by section 13951(c)(2) of Pub. L. 103-66. The provisions must 
be implemented for all households that newly apply for Program benefits 
on or after the required implementation date. The current caseload shall 
be converted to these provisions at household request, at the time of 
recertification, or when the case is next reviewed, whichever occurs 
first, and the State agency must provide restored benefits back to the 
required implementation date. If for any reason a State agency fails to 
implement on the required implementation date, restored benefits shall 
be provided, if appropriate, back to the required implementation date or 
the date of application, whichever is later.
    (135) Amendment No. 348. The provisions of Amendment No. 348 are 
effective August 5, 1994 and must be implemented for all QC billing 
actions beginning with Fiscal Year 1986.
    (136) Amendment No. 346. The provision of Amendment No. 346 
regarding an income exclusion for homeless

[[Page 517]]

households living in transitional housing is effective and must be 
implemented no later than September 1, 1994. Any variances resulting 
from implementation of the provisions of this amendment shall be 
excluded from error analysis for 120 days from this required 
implementation date in accordance with 7 CFR 275.12(d)(2)(vii). The 
provision must be implemented for all households that newly apply for 
Program benefits on or after the required implementation date. The 
current caseload shall be converted to these provisions at the 
household's request, at the time of recertification, or when the case is 
next reviewed, whichever occurs first. The State agency must provide 
restored benefits to such households back to the required implementation 
date or the date of application whichever is later. If for any reason a 
State agency fails to implement on the required implementation date, 
restored benefits shall be provided, if appropriate, back to the 
required implementation date or the date of application, whichever is 
later.
    (137) Amendment No. 350. The provisions of Amendment No. 350 are 
effective and must be implemented as follows:
    (i) The provision at Sec. 273.8(e)(12)(i) of this chapter is 
effective and must be implemented according to statute retroactive to 
January 1, 1991.
    (ii) The provision at Sec. 273.8(e)(12)(ii) of this chapter will be 
effective and must be implemented on September 1, 1994.
    (iii) The provision at Sec. 273.21(b) of this chapter against 
establishing new monthly reporting requirements for households residing 
on Indian reservations if no monthly reporting system was in place on 
March 25, 1994 is effective and must be implemented according to statute 
retroactive to March 25, 1994.
    (iv) The provision in Sec. 273.2(j) of this chapter concerning 
categorical eligibility for GA recipients is effective and must be 
implemented according to statute retroactive to February 1, 1992.
    (v) The remaining provisions are effective and must be implemented 
October 28, 1994.
    (138) Amendment No. 359. The provision of Amendment No. 359 
regarding the medical expense deduction is effective and must be 
implemented no later than October 1, 1994. Any variances resulting from 
implementation of the provisions of this amendment shall be excluded 
from error analysis for 120 days from this required implementation date 
in accordance with 275.12(d)(2)(vii) of this chapter. The provision must 
be implemented for all households that newly apply for Program benefits 
on or after the required implementation date. State agencies must notify 
households eligible for the deduction of the change in medical deduction 
reporting requirements and the right of the household to be converted to 
those new procedures immediately. The current caseload shall be 
converted to these provisions at the household's request, at the time of 
recertification, or when the case is next reviewed, whichever occurs 
first.
    (139) Amendment No. 351. The provisions of Amendment No. 351 to 
amend 7 CFR 273.7(d) are effective October 1, 1993. State agencies are 
not required to take any action to implement these provisions.
    (140) Amendment No. 333. The provisions of Amendment No. 333 are 
effective and must be implemented as follows:
    (i) The provisions relating to aggregated (combined) allotments to 
households applying after the 15th of the month and mail issuance in 
rural areas where households experience transportation difficulties in 
obtaining benefits are effective and must be implemented by statute 
retroactive to February 1, 1992.
    (ii) The provision relating to staggered issuance on Indian 
reservations was in place on March 25, 1994, is effective and must be 
implemented according to statute retroactive to March 25, 1994.
    (iii) The remaining provisions are effective and must be implemented 
September 1, 1995.
    (141) Amendment No. 360. This provision is effective September 20, 
1995, and must be implemented no later than the first day of the first 
month beginning December 19, 1995.
    (142) Amendment No. 357. The provisions of Amendment No. 357 are 
effective and must be implemented as follows:

[[Page 518]]

    (i) The provision relating to the increased penalties at 7 CFR 
273.16(b) is effective and must be implemented retroactive to September 
1, 1994. This includes providing notification of the increased penalties 
on the application form.
    (ii) The remaining provisions are effective and must be implemented 
October 23, 1995.
    (143) Amendment 367. The provisions of Amendment 367 must be 
implemented no later than October 2, 1995 except that State agencies 
currently participating in the Federal Income Tax Refund Offset Program 
(FTROP) must implement section 272.2(d)(1)(xii), which relates to the 
submission of the Plan of Operations, within November 30, 1995.
    (144) Amendment No. (370). The provisions of Amendment No. (370) are 
effective and must be implemented as follows:
    (i) Sections 273.5(b)(1), (b)(4), and (b)(9) are effective February 
1, 1992. The introductory paragraph of 273.5(b)(6) is effective February 
1, 1992. The introductory paragraph of 273.5(b)(10) is effective 
February 1, 1992. Sections 273.5(b)(11)(ii), (b)(11)(iii), and 
(b)(11)(iv) are effective February 1, 1992.
    (ii) Sections 273.5(b)(6)(i) and (b)(6)(ii) and sections 
273.5(b)(10)(i) and (b)(10)(ii) and the remaining provisions of this 
regulation are effective November 1, 1995 and shall be implemented no 
later than February 1, 1996.
    (iii) The current caseload shall be converted to these provisions at 
the household's request, at the time of recertification, or when the 
case is next reviewed, whichever occurs first. The State agency shall 
provide restored benefits back to the effective date.
    (iv) Any variance resulting from implementation of a provision in 
this rule shall be excluded from error analysis for 120 days from the 
required implementation date of that provision.
    (145) Amendment No. 369. The provisions of Amendment No. 369 are 
effective May 31, 1996. State agencies must implement no later than 
November 27, 1996. The provisions of this amendment are applicable for 
determinations of intentional failure to comply made on or after the 
effective date of the amendment.
    (146) Amendment No. 368. The provisions of Amendment No. 368 are 
effective on July 29, 1996.
    (147) Amendment No. 364. Except for the provisions of 
Sec. 273.14(b)(2), the provisions of Amendment No. 364 are effective 
November 18, 1996 and must be implemented no later than May 1, 1997. The 
effective date and implementation date of the provisions of 
Sec. 273.14(b)(2) will be announced in a document in the Federal 
Register. The provisions must be implemented for all households that 
newly apply for Program benefits on or after either the required 
implementation date or the date the State agency implements the 
provision prior to the required implementation date. The current 
caseload shall be converted to these provisions following implementation 
at the household's request, at the time of recertification, or when the 
case is next reviewed, whichever occurs first. The State agency must 
provide restored benefits to required implementation date or the date 
the State agency implemented the provision prior to the required 
implementation date. If for any reason a State agency fails to implement 
by the required implementation date, restored benefits shall be 
provided, if appropriate, back to the required implementation date or 
the date of application whichever is later, but for no more than 12 
months in accordance with Sec. 273.17(a) of this chapter. Any variances 
resulting from implementation of the provisions of this amendment shall 
be excluded from error analysis for 120 days from this required 
implementation date in accordance with Sec. 275.12(d)(2)(vii) of this 
chapter and 7 U.S.C. 2025(c)(3)(A).
    (148) Amendment No. 362. The provision of section 13921 of Public 
Law 103-66 establishing a child support deduction was effective 
September 1, 1994, and was required to be implemented no later than 
October 1, 1995. The provisions of Amendment No. 362 are effective 
December 16, 1996 and must be implemented no later than May 1, 1997. 
State agencies shall implement the provisions no later than the required 
implementation date. The provisions must be implemented for all 
households that newly apply for Program benefits on or after either the 
required

[[Page 519]]

implementation date or the date the State agency implemented the 
provision prior to the required implementation date, whichever is 
earlier. State agencies are required to adjust the cases of 
participating households at the next recertification, at household 
request, or when the case is next reviewed, whichever comes first. State 
agencies which fail to implement or adjust cases by the required 
implementation date shall provide restored benefits as appropriate. For 
quality control purposes, any variances resulting from implementation of 
the provisions are excluded from error analysis for 120 days from the 
required implementation date, in accordance with 7 CFR 275.12(d)(2)(vii) 
and 7 U.S.C. 2025(c)(3)(A). State agencies which implement prior to the 
required implementation date must notify the appropriate regional office 
prior to implementation that they wish the variance exclusion period to 
begin with actual implementation, as provided in 7 CFR 
275.12(d)(2)(vii)(A). Absent such notification, the exclusionary period 
will begin with the required implementation date.
    (149) Amendment No. 374. The Higher Education Act Amendments of 
1986, as amended in 1987, were effective and required to be implemented 
for the 1988-89 school year; the Perkins Act was effective and required 
to be implemented on July 1, 1991; the Mickey Leland Act (as amended by 
the 1991 Technical Amendments to the Food Stamp Act) was effective and 
required to be implemented on February 1, 1992, and the exclusions 
contained in the Higher Education Act Amendments of 1992 for the Tribal 
Development Student Assistance Revolving Loan Program were effective and 
required to be implemented on October 1, 1992, and for Title IV and BIA 
student assistance on July 1, 1993. The provisions of Amendment No. 374 
are effective December 16, 1996 and must be implemented by March 1, 
1997. The current caseload shall be converted to these provisions at the 
household's request, at the time of recertification, or when the case is 
next reviewed, whichever occurs first. If implementation of the acts 
referenced in this paragraph or this amendment is delayed, benefits 
shall be restored, as appropriate, in accordance with the Food Stamp 
Act. Any variance resulting from implementation of this amendment shall 
be excluded from error analysis for 120 days from March 1, 1997.
    (150) Amendment No. 365. This provision is effective December 16, 
1996 and must be implemented no later than March 1, 1997. Any variances 
resulting from implementation of the provisions of this amendment shall 
be excluded from error analysis for 120 days from this required 
implementation date in accordance with Sec. 275.12(d)(2)(vii) of this 
chapter.
    (151) Amendment No. 375. Public Law 103-66, the Mickey Leland 
Childhood Hunger Relief Act, was effective and required to be 
implemented on September 1, 1994. The provisions of Amendment No. 375 
are effective December 16, 1996, and must be implemented by March 1, 
1997. The State agency shall implement the provisions of this amendment 
no later than the appropriate required implementation date for all 
households newly applying for Program benefits on or after such 
implementation date. The current caseload shall be converted to these 
provisions at household request, at the time of recertification, or when 
the case is next reviewed, whichever occurs first, and the State agency 
must provide restored benefits, as may be appropriate under the Food 
Stamp Act, back to the appropriate required implementation date. If for 
any reason a State agency fails to implement on the appropriate 
implementation date, restored benefits shall be provided, if 
appropriate, back to the appropriate required implementation date or the 
date of application, whichever is later. Any variances resulting from 
implementation of this amendment shall be excluded from quality control 
error analysis for 120 days from March 1, 1997.
    (152) Amendment No. 361  The provisions of Amendment No. 361 are 
effective December 26, 1996, and must be implemented May 27, 1997. Any 
variances resulting from implementation of the provisions of this 
amendment shall be excluded from error analysis for 120 days from this 
required implementation date in accordance with 7 CFR 275.12(d)(2)(vii). 
The provision must be

[[Page 520]]

implemented for all households that newly apply for Program benefits on 
or after the required implementation date. The current caseload shall be 
converted to these provisions at the household's request, at the time of 
recertification, or when the case is next reviewed, whichever occurs 
first. The State agency must provide restored benefits to such 
households back to the required implementation date or the date of 
application whichever is later.
    If for any reason a State agency fails to implement on the required 
implementation date, restored benefits shall be provided, if 
appropriate, back to the required implementation date or the date of 
application whichever is later, but for no more than 12 months in 
accordance with Sec. 273.17(a) of this chapter.

[Amdt. 132, 43 FR 47884, Oct. 17, 1978]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 272.1, 
see the List of CFR Sections Affected appearing in the Finding Aids 
section of this volume.


<R05>
Sec. 272.2  Plan of operation.

    (a) General purpose and content--(1) Purpose. State agencies shall 
periodically plan and budget program operations and establish 
objectives. When planning and budgeting for program operations for the 
next year, State agencies shall consider major corrective action 
objectives, existing program strengths and deficiencies, and other 
factors anticipated to impact on the operation of the State's Food Stamp 
Program and on projected expenditures.
    (2) Content. The basic components of the State Plan of Operation are 
the Federal/State Agreement, the Budget Projection Statement, and the 
Program Activity Statement. In addition, certain attachments to the Plan 
are specified in this section and in Sec. 272.3. The requirements for 
the basic components and attachments are specified in Sec. 272.2(c) and 
Sec. 272.2(d) respectively. The Federal/State Agreement is the legal 
agreement between the State and the Department of Agriculture. This 
Agreement is the means by which the State elects to operate the Food 
Stamp Program and to administer the program in accordance with the Food 
Stamp Act of 1977, as amended, regulations issued pursuant to the Act 
and the FCS-approved State Plan of Operation. The Budget Projection 
Statement and Program Activity Statement provide information on the 
number of actions and amounts budgeted for various functional areas such 
as certification and issuance. The Plan's attachments include the 
Quality Control Sample Plan, the Disaster Plan (currently reserved), the 
Employment and Training Plan, the optional Nutrition Education Plan, the 
optional plan for Program informational activities directed to low-
income households, the optional plan for intercepting Unemployment 
Compensation (UC) benefits for collecting claims for intentional Program 
violations, the Systematic Alien Verification for Entitlements (SAVE) 
Plan, and the plan for the State Income and Eligibility Verification 
System. The State agency shall either include the Workfare Plan in its 
State Plan of Operation or append the Workfare Plan to the State Plan of 
Operation, as appropriate, in accordance with Sec. 273.22(b)(3) of this 
chapter. The Workfare Plan shall be submitted separately, in accordance 
with Sec. 273.22(b)(1) of this chapter. The ADP/CIS Plan is considered 
part of the State Plan of Operation but is submitted separately as 
prescribed under Sec. 272.2(e)(8). State agencies and/or political 
subdivisions selected to operate a Simplified Application/Standardized 
Benefit Project shall include that Project's Work Plan in the State Plan 
of Operation. The Plan's attachments shall also include the Mail 
Issuance Loss Reporting Level Plan. The Plan's attachments shall 
describe the State agency's review of direct-mail issuance requirements 
in rural areas. The Plan's attachments shall also include the commitment 
to conduct the optional Federal Income Tax Refund Offset Program and the 
Federal Salary Offset Program.
    (b) Federal/State Agreement. (1) The wording of the pre-printed 
Federal/State Agreement is as follows:

    The State of ______ and the Food and Consumer Service (FCS), U.S. 
Department of Agriculture (USDA), hereby agree to act in accordance with 
the provisions of the Food Stamp Act of 1977, as amended, implementing 
regulations and the FCS-approved State Plan of Operation. The State and 
FCS (USDA) further agree to fully comply with

[[Page 521]]

any changes in Federal law and regulations. This agreement may be 
modified with the mutual written consent of both parties.

                               Provisions

    The State agrees to: 1. Administer the program in accordance with 
the provisions contained in the Food Stamp Act of 1977, as amended, and 
in the manner prescribed by regulations issued pursuant to the Act; and 
to implement the FCS-approved State Plan of Operation.
    2. Comply with Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Pub. L. 88-
352), section 11(c) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977, as amended, the Age 
Discrimination Act of 1975 (Pub. L. 94-135) and the Rehabilitation Act 
of 1973 (Pub. L. 93-112, sec. 504) and all requirements imposed by the 
regulations issued pursuant to these Acts by the Department of 
Agriculture to the effect that, no person in the United States shall, on 
the grounds of sex, race, color, age, political belief, religion, 
handicap, or national origin, be excluded from participation in, be 
denied the benefits of, or be otherwise subject to discrimination under 
the Food Stamp Program.
    3. (For States with Indian Reservations only). Implement the Program 
in a manner that is responsive to the special needs of American Indians 
on reservations and consult in good faith with tribal organizations 
about that portion of the State's Plan of Operation pertaining to the 
implementation of the Program for members of the tribe on reservations.
    FCS agrees to: 1. Pay administrative costs in accordance with the 
Food Stamp Act, implementing regulations, and an approved Cost 
Allocation Plan.
    2. Carry-out any other responsibilities delegated by the Secretary 
in the Food Stamp Act of 1977, as amended.

Date____________________________________________________________________

Signature_______________________________________________________________
(Governor or Authorized Designee)

Date____________________________________________________________________

Signature_______________________________________________________________
(Regional Administrator, FCS)

    (2) The State agency may propose alternative language to any or all 
the provisions listed in paragraph (b)(1) of this section. The 
alternative language is subject to approval by both parties before 
signature.
    (c) Budget Projection Statement and Program Activity Statement. (1) 
The State agency shall submit to FCS for approval a Budget Projection 
Statement and Program Activity Statement in accordance with the 
submittal dates in Sec. 272.2(e).
    (i) The Budget Projection Statement solicits projections of the 
total costs for major areas of program operations. The Budget Projection 
Statement shall be submitted annually and updated as necessary through 
the year. The Budget Projection Statement shall contain projections for 
each quarter of the next Federal fiscal year. The State agency shall 
submit with the Budget Projection Statement a narrative justification 
documenting and explaining the assumptions used to arrive at the 
projections. The narrative shall cover such subjects as: The number and 
salary level of employees; other factors affecting personnel costs 
including anticipated increases in pay rates or benefits, and 
reallocations of staff among units or functions, insofar as these might 
result in cost increases or decreases; costs for purchasing, leasing, 
and maintaining equipment and space, especially as concerns any 
upcoming, one-time-only purchases of new capital assets such as ADP 
equipment, renegotiation of leases, changes in depreciation rates or 
procedures, relocation of offices, maintenance and renovation work, and 
inflation; issuance system costs, including renegotiation of issuing 
agent fees and plans to change issuance systems; changes in caseload and 
factors contributing to increases or decreases in the number of 
participants; recertifications, including the anticipated impact of 
economic conditions (and in particular unemployment) and seasonality; 
cost implications of corrective action plans; anticipated changes in 
program regulations and operating guidelines and instructions; training 
needs; travel costs; and adjustments in insurance premiums. The 
narrative should cover as many of the items listed above, and any other 
items deemed relevant by the State agency, that will have a significant 
impact on costs. The State agency is not required to discuss every item 
in the list in every submission of a Budget Projection Statement. The 
narrative should concentrate on items that account for increases or 
decreases in costs from the preceding submissions.
    (ii) The Program Activity Statement, to be submitted annually, 
solicits a summary of program activity for the

[[Page 522]]

State agency's operations during the preceding fiscal year.
    (2) The organizational outline submitted in 1982 as an attachment to 
the Program Activity Statement shall be considered the basic outline. 
Henceforth, changes to this outline shall be provided to FCS as they 
occur. The outline contains the following information:
    (i) The position of the head of the State agency responsible for 
administering the Food Stamp Program in relation to the overall State 
organizational structure, i.e., the Program Director in relation to the 
Commissioner of Welfare;
    (ii) A description of the organizational structure through which the 
State agency will administer and operate the Food Stamp Program, 
including whether the Program is State, county, locally, or regionally-
administered; whether the workers have single Food Stamp Program or 
multi-program functions; and the title and position of the individual or 
panel designated as the hearing authority and whether officials conduct 
both fair and fraud hearings.
    (iii) A description of the funding arrangement by which State, 
county, and local jurisdictions will contribute to the State agency 
portion of administrative costs;
    (iv) The position within the State organizational structure of the 
Performance Reporting System (PRS) coordinator, including whether the 
PRS coordinator is full or part-time, and is responsible for direct 
supervision over Quality Control or Management Evaluation or if these 
functions are handled separately, and whether quality control reviewers 
have single Food Stamp Program or multi-program review responsibilities;
    (v) The position of the training coordinator and whether this is a 
full or part-time position; and
    (vi) The organizational entity responsible for corrective action.
    (3) Additional attachments. The following shall be attachments or 
addenda to the Program Activity Statement and shall be submitted as 
required in Sec. 272.2(e)(3):
    (i) The special plan required by Sec. 277.15 when requesting Federal 
funding at the present 75 percent level for investigation and 
prosecution activities; and
    (ii) For informational purposes (not subject to approval as part of 
the plan submission procedures), the agreements between the State agency 
and the United States Postal Service for coupon issuance, between the 
State agency and the Social Security Administration for supplemental 
security income/food stamp joint application processing and for routine 
user status.
    (d) Planning documents. (1) The following planning documents shall 
be submitted:
    (i) Quality Control Sampling Plan as required by Sec. 275.11(a)(4);
    (ii) Disaster Plan as required by Sec. 280.6 (currently reserved), 
or certification that a previously submitted Disaster Plan has been 
reviewed and remains current;
    (iii) Nutrition Education Plan if the State agency elects to request 
Federal Food Stamp Program administrative matching funds to conduct 
nutrition education programs as discussed in paragraph (d)(2) of this 
section.
    (iv) A plan for the State Income and Eligibility Verification System 
required by Sec. 272.8.
    (v) Employment and Training Plan as required in Sec. 273.7 (c)(4) 
and (5).
    (vi) ADP/CIS Plan as required by Sec. 272.10.
    (vii) A plan for the Systematic Alien Verification for Entitlements 
(SAVE) Program as required by Sec. 272.11(e).
    (viii) Mail Issuance Loss Reporting Level Plan required by 
Sec. 276.2(b)(4), for the State agency using mail issuance, shall 
contain the unit level of reporting mail issuance losses for the 
upcoming fiscal year as elected by the State agency. If a State agency 
does not revise its Plan by August 15 in any given year, FCS shall 
continue to require reporting and to assess liabilities for the next 
fiscal year at the level last indicated by the State agency. If the 
agency has selected the unit provided for in Sec. 276.2(b)(4)(ii), a 
listing of the issuance sites or counties comprising each administrative 
unit within the State agency shall also be included in the Plan.

[[Page 523]]

    (ix) A plan for Program informational activities as specified in 
Sec. 272.5(c).
    (x) A plan for intercepting UC benefits for collecting claims for 
intentional program violations as specified in Sec. 272.12 if the State 
agency elects to use that procedure.
    (xi) A plan to review direct-mail issuance requirements in rural 
areas. State agencies using direct-mail issuance throughout the State 
with exceptions only for individual households, shall simply state this 
fact. State agencies which use methods of benefit issuance other than 
direct-mail issuance in any part of the State shall submit an attachment 
to their State Plan of Operation which includes the State agency's 
procedure for reviewing direct-mail issuance requirements in rural 
areas, and the results of applying that procedure for designating parts 
of, or entire, project areas as requiring direct-mail issuance because 
they are rural, and are areas in which benefit-eligible households face 
substantial difficulties in obtaining transportation. The requirements 
for this attachment to the State Plan of Operation are described in 
Sec. 274.2(g) of this chapter.
    (xii) If the State agency chooses to implement the Federal Income 
Tax Refund Offset Program and the Federal Salary Offset Program, the 
Plan's attachments shall include a statement in which the State agency 
states that it will comply with the provisions of Sections 273.18 (g)(5) 
and (g)(6) of this chapter.
    (2) Nutrition Education Plan. If submitted, the Nutrition Education 
Plan shall contain:
    (i) The number and positions of staff that will be conducting 
nutrition education;
    (ii) Description of activities in the nutrition education program; 
and
    (iii) Assurance that nutrition education programs for which USDA 
provides Food Stamp Program administrative matching funds are conducted 
exclusively for the benefit of Food Stamp Program applicants and 
participants and do not duplicate USDA's Expanded Food and Nutrition 
Education Program's efforts in the State.
    (e) Submittal requirements. States shall submit to the appropriate 
FCS Regional Office for approval each of the components of the Plan of 
Operation for approval within the timeframes established by this 
paragraph. Approval or denial of the document may be withheld pending 
review by FCS. However, if FCS fails to either approve, deny, or request 
additional information within 30 days, the document is approved. If 
additional information is requested, the State agency shall provide this 
as soon as possible, and FCS shall approve or deny the Plan within 30 
days after receiving the information.
    (1) The Federal/State agreement shall be signed by the Governor of 
the State or authorized designee and shall be submitted to FCS within 
120 days after publication of these regulations in final form and shall 
remain in effect until terminated.
    (2) The Budget Projection Statement and Program Activity Statement 
shall be signed by the head of the State agency or its chief financial 
officer and submitted as follows:
    (i) The Budget Projection Statement shall be submitted annually, no 
later than August 15 of each year.
    (ii) The Program Activity Statement shall be submitted annually, not 
later than 45 days after the end of the State agency's fiscal year. The 
first report is due 45 days after the end of the State's 1981 fiscal 
year. The first report is not required to contain information that is 
not currently captured by the State agency's information system. State 
agencies shall amend their data gathering systems so that all items can 
be completed on the second report, due for the 1982 fiscal year.
    (3) Changes to the organizational outline required by 
Sec. 272.2(c)(2) and the agreements with other agencies outlined in 
Sec. 272.2(c)(3)(ii) shall be provided to FCS as changes occur. The 
attachments outlined in Sec. 272.2(c)(3)(i) shall be submitted annually 
with the Program Activity Statement.
    (4) The Quality Control Sampling Plan shall be signed by the head of 
the State agency and submitted to FCS prior to implementation as 
follows:
    (i) According to the timeframes specified in paragraph (e)(4)(ii) of 
this section, prior to each annual review period each State agency shall 
submit

[[Page 524]]

any changes in their sampling plan for FCS approval or submit a 
statement that there are no such changes. These submittals shall include 
the statement required by Sec. 275.11(a)(2), if appropriate. The Quality 
Control Sampling Plan in effect for each State agency as of the 
beginning of Fiscal Year 1984 shall be considered submitted and approved 
for purposes of this section, provided that the State agency has 
obtained prior FCS approval of its sampling plan.
    (ii) Initial submissions of and major changes to sampling plans and 
changes in sampling plans resulting from general changes in procedure 
shall be submitted to FCS for approval at least 60 days prior to 
implementation. Minor changes to approved sampling plans shall be 
submitted at least 30 days prior to implementation.
    (5) Disaster Plan. [Reserved]
    (6) The Nutrition Education Plan shall be signed by the head of the 
State agency and submitted prior to funding of nutrition education 
activities when the State agency elects to request Federal 
administrative matching funds to conduct Nutrition Education Programs. 
The plan shall then be submitted annually no later than August 15. The 
initial submission may be for a period of less than or more than a year 
in order to meet the August 15 deadline.
    (7) Where applicable, State agencies shall consult (on an ongoing 
basis) with the tribal organization of an Indian reservation about those 
portions of the State Plan of Operation pertaining to the special needs 
of the members of the tribe.
    (8) ADP/CIS Plan. The ADP/CIS Plan shall be signed by the head of 
the State agency and submitted to FCS by October 1, 1987. State agencies 
which require additional time to complete their ADP/CIS plan may submit 
their plan in two phases as described in Sec. 272.10(a)(2), with the 
first part of the plan being submitted October 1, 1987. State agencies 
requiring additional time shall submit the second part of their plans by 
January 1, 1988. If FCS requests additional information to be provided 
in the State agency ADP/CIS Plan or if FCS requests that changes be made 
in the State agency ADP/CIS Plan, State agencies must comply with FCS 
comments and submit an approvable ADP/CIS Plan within 60 days of their 
receipt of the FCS comments but in no event later than March 1, 1988. 
Requirements for the ADP/CIS plan are specified in Sec. 272.10.
    (9) The Employment and Training Plan shall be submitted as specified 
under Sec. 273.7(c)(5).
    (f) Revisions. Revisions to any of the planning documents or the 
Program and Budget Summary Statement shall be prepared and submitted for 
approval to the appropriate FCS Regional Office in the same manner as 
the original document. However, revisions to the budget portion of the 
Budget Projection Statement and Program Activity Statement shall be 
submitted as follows:
    (1) Program funds. (i) For program funds, State agencies shall 
request prior approvals promptly from FCS for budget revisions whenever:
    (A) The revision indicates the need for additional Federal funding;
    (B) The program budget exceeds $100,000, and the cumulative amount 
of transfers among program functions exceeds or is expected to exceed 
five percent of the program budget. The same criteria apply to the 
cumulative amount of transfers among functions and activities when 
budgeted separately for program funds provided to a subagency, except 
that FCS shall permit no transfer which would cause any Federal 
appropriation, or part thereof, to be used for purposes other than those 
intended;
    (C) The revisions involve the transfer of amounts budgeted for 
indirect costs to absorb increases in direct costs; or
    (D) The revisions pertain to the addition of items requiring prior 
approval by FCS in accordance with the provisions of the applicable cost 
principles specified in part 277 appendix A of the regulations.
    (ii) No other changes to the Program fund budget require approval 
from FCS. Examples of changes which do not require Federal approval are: 
The use of State agency funds to accomplish program objectives over and 
above the State agency minimum share included in the approved Program 
budget; and the transfer of amounts budgeted for direct costs to absorb 
authorized increases in indirect costs.

[[Page 525]]

    (iii) The requirements of paragraph (f)(1)(i)(B) of this section may 
be waived by FCS provided that:
    (A) No different limitation or approval requirement may be imposed; 
and,
    (B) FCS shall not permit a transfer which would cause any Federal 
appropriation, or part, thereof, to be used for purpose other than those 
intended.
    (2) Authorized funds exceeding State agency needs. When it becomes 
apparent that the funds authorized by the Letter of Credit will exceed 
the needs of the State agency, FCS will make appropriate adjustments in 
the Letter of Credit in accordance with part 277.
    (3) Method of requesting approvals. When requesting approval for 
budget revisions, State agencies shall use the same format as the Budget 
Projection Statement used in the previous submission. However, State 
agencies may request by letter the approvals required by paragraph 
(f)(1)(i)(D) of this section.
    (4) Notification of approval or disapproval. Within 30 days from the 
date of receipt of the request for budget revisions, FCS shall review 
the request and notify the State agency whether or not the budget 
revisions have been approved. If the revision is still under 
consideration at the end of 30 days, FCS shall inform the State agency 
in writing as to when the decision will be made.

[Amdt. 156, 46 FR 6315, Jan. 21, 1981]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 272.2, 
see the List of CFR Sections Affected appearing in the Finding Aids 
section of this volume.


<R05>
Sec. 272.3  Operating guidelines and forms.

    (a) Coverage of operating guidelines. State agencies shall prepare 
and provide to staff responsible for administering the Program written 
operating procedures. In those States which have State regulations that 
outline these Operating Procedures, these are equivalent to Operating 
Guidelines. Other examples of Operating Guidelines are manuals, 
instructions, directives or transmittal memos. The following categories 
shall be included in the Operating Guidelines:
    (1) Certification of households, including but not limited to:
    (i) Application processing;
    (ii) Nonfinancial eligibility standards;
    (iii) Financial criteria and the eligibility determination;
    (iv) Actions resulting from eligibility determinations;
    (v) Determining eligibility of special situation households as 
specified in Sec. 273.11;
    (vi) Additional certification functions such as processing changes 
during certification periods and reporting requirements for households;
    (vii) Lost benefits/claims against households;
    (viii) Fair/fraud hearings;
    (ix) A list of Federal and State energy assistance programs that 
qualify for the resource and income exclusions discussed in 
Sec. 273.8(e)(14) and Sec. 273.9(c)(11) and how these payments are 
identified as being eligible for the exemption;
    (x) Work registration and employment and training requirements.
    (2) Issuance, accountability, and reconciliation;
    (3) The Performance Reporting System, including instructions or 
directives for conducting quality control and management evaluation 
reviews and the quality control sample plan;
    (4) A description of the training program, including a listing of 
the organizational component which conducts training, to whom and how 
often training is provided;
    (5) The fair/fraud hearing procedures if not included in the 
Certification Handbook.
    (6) The consultation process (where applicable) with the tribal 
organization of an Indian reservation about the State Plan of Operation 
and Operating Guidelines in terms of the special needs of members of the 
tribe and the method to be used for incorporating the comments from the 
tribal organization into the State Plan of Operations and Operating 
Guidelines.
    (b) Submittal of operating guidelines and forms. (1) State agencies 
shall develop the necessary forms, except the Application for Food 
Stamps, and other operating guidelines to implement the provisions of 
the Food Stamp Act and regulations. In accordance with Sec. 273.2(b) and 
Sec. 273.12(b)(1) State

[[Page 526]]

agencies shall use the FCS-designed Application for Food Stamps or an 
FCS-approved deviation.
    (2) State agencies shall submit their operating guidelines and forms 
and amendments to these materials to FCS for review and audit purposes 
simultaneous with distribution within the States.
    (3) State agencies may request that FCS review and provide comments 
on their operating guidelines, forms and any amendments to these 
materials prior to distribution of the materials within the State.
    (4) If deficiencies are discovered in a State agency's materials, 
FCS shall provide the State agency with written notification.
    (c) Waivers. (1) The Administrator of the Food and Consumer Service 
or Deputy Administrator for Family Nutrition Programs may authorize 
waivers to deviate from specific regulatory provisions. Requests for 
waivers may be approved only in the following situations:
    (i) The specific regulatory provision cannot be implemented due to 
extraordinary temporary situations such as a sudden increase in the 
caseload due to the loss of SSI cash-out status;
    (ii) FCS determines that the waiver would result in a more effective 
and efficient administration of the program; or
    (iii) Unique geographic or climatic conditions within a State 
preclude effective implementation of the specific regulatory provision 
and require an alternate procedure; for example, the use of fee agents 
in Alaska to perform many of the duties involved in the certification of 
households including conducting the interviews.
    (2) FCS shall not approve requests for waivers when:
    (i) The waiver would be inconsistent with the provisions of the Act; 
or
    (ii) The waiver would result in material impairment of any statutory 
or regulatory rights of participants or potential participants.
    (3) FCS shall approve waivers for a period not to exceed one year 
unless the waiver is for an on-going situation. If the waiver is 
requested for longer than a year, appropriate justification shall be 
required and FCS will determine if a longer period is warranted and if 
so, the duration of the waiver. Extensions may be granted provided that 
States submit appropriate justification as part of the State Plan of 
Operation.
    (4) When submitting requests for waivers, State agencies shall 
provide compelling justification for the waiver in terms of how the 
waiver will improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the 
administration of the Program. At a minimum, requests for waivers shall 
include but not necessarily be limited to:
    (i) Reasons why the waiver is needed;
    (ii) The portion of caseload or potential caseload which would be 
affected and the characteristics of the affected caseload such as 
geographic, urban, or rural concentration;
    (iii) Anticipated impact on service to participants or potential 
participants who would be affected;
    (iv) Anticipated time period for which the waiver is needed; and
    (v) Thorough explanation of the proposed alternative provision to be 
used in lieu of the waived regulatory provision.
    (5) Notwithstanding the preceding paragraphs, waivers of the 
certification period timeframes as described in Sec. 273.10(f) may be 
granted by the Administrator of the Food and Consumer Service or the 
Deputy Administrator for Family Nutrition Programs as provided in 
section 3(c) of the Act. Waivers authorized by this paragraph are not 
subject to the public comment provisions of Sec. 272.3(d).
    (6) Notwithstanding the preceding paragraphs, waivers may be granted 
by the Administrator of the Food and Consumer Service or the Deputy 
Administrator for Family Nutrition Programs as provided in section 5(f) 
of the Act. Waivers authorized by this paragraph are not subject to the 
public comment provisions of Sec. 272.3(d).
    (7) Notwithstanding the preceding paragraphs, waivers may be granted 
by the Administrator of the Food and Consumer Service or the Deputy 
Administrator for Family Nutrition Programs as provided in section 6(c) 
of the Act. Waivers authorized by this paragraph are not subject to the 
public comment provisions of Sec. 272.3(d).

[[Page 527]]

    (d) Public comment. State agencies shall solicit public input and 
comment on overall Program operations as State laws require or as the 
individual State agency believes would be useful.

[Amdt. 156, 46 FR 6315, Jan. 21, 1981]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 272.3, 
see the List of CFR Sections Affected appearing in the Finding Aids 
section of this volume.


<R05>
Sec. 272.4  Program administration and personnel requirements.

    (a) Merit personnel.  (1) State agency personnel used in the 
certification process shall be employed in accordance with the current 
standards for a merit system of personnel administration or any 
standards later prescribed by the U.S. Civil Service Commission under 
section 208 of the Intergovernmental Personnel Act of 1970.
    (2) State agency employees meeting the standards outlined in 
paragraph (a)(1) of this section shall perform the interviews required 
in Sec. 273.2(e). Volunteers and other non-State agency employees shall 
not conduct certification interviews or certify food stamp applicants. 
Exceptions to the use of State merit system personnel in the interview 
and certification process are specified in Sec. 273.2(k) for SSI 
households, Sec. 272.7(d) for households residing in rural Alaska, and 
part 280 for disaster victims. State agencies are encouraged to use 
volunteers in activities such as outreach, prescreening, assisting 
applicants in the application and certification process, and in securing 
needed verification. Individuals and organizations who are parties to a 
strike or lockout, and their facilities, may not be used in the 
certification process except as a source of verification for information 
supplied by the applicant. Only authorized employees of the State 
agency, coupon issuers, coupon bulk storage points, and Federal 
employees involved in administration of the program shall be permitted 
access to food coupons, ATP's, or other issuance documents.
    (b) Bilingual requirements. (1) Based on the estimated total number 
of low-income households in a project area which speak the same non-
English language (a single-language minority), the State agency shall 
provide bilingual program information and certification materials, and 
staff or interpreters as specified in paragraphs (b) (2) and (3) of this 
section. Single-language minority refers to households which speak the 
same non-English language and which do not contain adult(s) fluent in 
English as a second language;
    (2) The State agency shall provide materials used in Program 
informational activities in the appropriate language(s) as follows:
    (i) In project areas with less than 2,000 low-income households, if 
approximately 100 or more of those households are of a single-language 
minority;
    (ii) In project areas with 2,000 or more low-income households, if 
approximately 5 percent or more of those households are of a single-
language minority; and
    (iii) In project areas with a certification office that provides 
bilingual service as required in paragraph (b)(3) of this section.
    (3) The State agency shall provide both certification materials in 
the appropriate language(s) and bilingual staff or interpreters as 
follows:
    (i) In each individual certification office that provides service to 
an area containing approximately 100 single-language minority low-income 
households; and
    (ii) In each project area with a total of less than 100 low-income 
households if a majority of those households are of a single-language 
minority.
    (A) Certification materials shall include the food stamp application 
form, change report form and notices to households.
    (B) If notices are required in only one language other than English, 
notices may be printed in English on one side and in the other language 
on the reverse side. If the certification office is required to use 
several languages, the notice may be printed in English and may contain 
statements in other languages summarizing the purpose of the notice and 
the telephone number (toll-free number or a number where collect calls 
will be accepted for households outside the local calling area) which 
the household may call to receive additional information. For example, a 
notice of eligibility could in the appropriate language(s) state:


[[Page 528]]


    Your application for food stamps has been approved in the amount 
stated above. If you need more information telephone __________.

    (4) In project areas with a seasonal influx of non-English-speaking 
households, the State agency shall provide bilingual materials and staff 
or interpreters, if during the seasonal influx the number of single-
language minority low-income households which move into the area meets 
or exceeds the requirements in paragraphs (b) (2) and (3) of this 
section.
    (5) The State agency shall insure that certification offices subject 
to the requirements of paragraph (b) (3) or (4) of this section provide 
sufficient bilingual staff or interpreters for the timely processing of 
non-English-speaking applicants.
    (6) The State agency shall develop estimates of the number of low-
income single-language minority households, both participating and not 
participating in the program, for each project area and certification 
office by using census data (including the Census Bureau's Current 
Population Report: Population Estimates and Projections, Series P-25, 
No. 627) and knowledge of project areas and areas serviced by 
certification offices. Local Bureau of Census offices, Community 
Services Administration offices, community action agencies, planning 
agencies, migrant service organizations, and school officials may be 
important sources of information in determining the need for bilingual 
service. If these information sources do not provide sufficient 
information for the State agency to determine if there is a need for 
bilingual staff or interpreters, each certification office shall, for a 
6-month period, record the total number of single-language minority 
households that visit the office to make inquiries about the program, 
file a new application for benefits, or be recertified. Those 
certification offices that are contacted by a total of over 100 single-
language minority households in the 6-month period shall be required to 
provide bilingual staff or interpreters. State agencies shall also 
combine the figures collected in each certification office to determine 
the need for bilingual outreach materials in each project area.
    (c) Internal controls--(1) Requirements.  In order to safeguard 
certification and issuance records from unauthorized creation or 
tampering, the State agency shall establish an organizational structure 
which divides the responsibility for eligibility determinations and 
coupon issuance among certification, data management, and issuance 
units. The certification unit shall be responsible for the determination 
of household eligibility and the creation of records and documents to 
authorize the issuance of coupons to eligible households. The data 
management unit, in response to input from the certification unit, shall 
create and maintain the household issuance record (HIR) master file on 
cards, computer discs, tapes, or similar memory devices. The issuance 
unit shall provide certified households with the authorized allotments. 
In cases where personnel are periodically, or on a part-time basis, 
shifted from one unit to another, supervisory controls should be 
sufficient to assure that the unauthorized creation or modification of 
case records is not possible.
    (2) Exceptions.  With prior written FCS approval, a project area may 
combine unit responsibilities if the controls specified in paragraph 
(c)(1) of this section have been found to be administratively 
infeasible.
    (i) To receive approval of combined operations, the State agency 
shall establish special review requirements which at a minimum include:
    (A) Biweekly reconciliation and verification of transactions; and
    (B) Semiannual comparison of HIR cards and case records as required 
by Sec. 274.6(d) and, at least once every other month, second-party 
review of certification actions.
    (ii) The State agency shall annually determine whether each combined 
operation continues to be justified and shall so advise FCS in writing.
    (d) Training--(1) Minimum requirements. (i) The State agency shall 
institute a continuing training program for food stamp eligibility 
workers, hearing officials, and performance reporting system reviewers. 
Sufficient training shall be provided to these people prior to their 
initial assumption of duties and, subsequently, on an as-needed

[[Page 529]]

basis. Training must convey the goals and methods for promptly and 
accurately certifying eligible households.
    (ii) The State agency shall provide sufficent staff time to ensure 
that the minimum training requirements are met.
    (2) Additional training. At their option, State agencies may provide 
or contract to provide training and assistance to persons working with 
volunteer or nonprofit organizations that provide program information 
activities or eligibility screening to persons potentially eligible for 
food stamps.
    (3) FCS Review. FCS will review the effectiveness of State agency 
training based on information obtained from the performance reporting 
system and other sources.
    (e) Court suit reporting. (1) State agency responsibility. (i) In 
the event that a State agency is sued by any person(s) in a State or 
Federal Court in any matter which involves the State agency's 
administration of the Food Stamp Program, the State agency shall 
immediately notify FCS that suit has been brought and shall furnish FCS 
with copies of the original pleadings. State agencies involved in suits 
shall, upon request of FCS, take such action as is necessary to join the 
United States and/or appropriate officials of the Federal Government, 
such as the Secretary of USDA or the Administrator of FCS, as parties to 
the suit. FCS may request to join the following types of suits:
    (A) Class action suits;
    (B) A suit in which an adverse decision could have a national 
impact;
    (C) A suit challenging Federal policy such as a provision of the Act 
or regulations or an interpretation of the regulations; or,
    (D) A suit based on an empirical situation that is likely to recur.
    (ii) FCS may advise a State agency to seek a settlement agreement of 
a court suit if the State agency is being sued because it misapplied 
Federal policy in administering the Program.
    (iii) State agencies shall notify FCS when court cases have been 
dismissed or otherwise settled. State agencies shall also provide FCS 
with information that is requested regarding the State agency's 
compliance with the requirements of court orders or settlement 
agreements.
    (2) FCS shall notify all State agencies of any suits brought in 
Federal court that involve FCS' administration of the Program and which 
have the potential of affecting many State agencies' Progam operations. 
(State agencies need not be notified of suits brought in Federal Court 
involving FCS' administration of the Program which may only affect 
Program operations in one or two States.) The notification provided to 
State agencies shall contain a description of the Federal policy that is 
involved in the litigation.
    (f) State monitoring of duplicate participation. (1) Each State 
agency shall establish a system to assure that no individual 
participates more than once in a month, in more than one jurisdiction, 
or in more than one household within the State in the Food Stamp 
Program. To identify such individuals, the system shall use names and 
social security numbers at a minimum, and other identifiers such as 
birth dates or addresses as appropriate.
    (i) If the State agency detects a large number of duplicates, it 
shall implement other measures, such as more frequent checks or 
increased emphasis on prevention.
    (ii) If the State agency provides cash assistance in lieu of coupons 
for SSI recipients or for households participating in cash-out 
demonstration projects, the State agency shall check to assure that no 
individual receives both coupons and other benefits provided in lieu of 
coupons. Checks to detect individuals receiving both food coupons and 
cash-out benefits, or any other form of duplicate benefits, shall be 
made at the time of certification, recertification, and whenever a new 
member is added to an existing household. However, if the State agency 
can show that these time frames are incompatible with its system, the 
State agency shall check for duplicate benefits when necessary, but no 
less often than annually.
    (2) Processing standards for duplicate participation checks at 
certification and recertification shall not delay the issuance of 
benefits.
    (i) If the State agency chooses to check at the time of 
certification and

[[Page 530]]

recertification, the check for duplicates shall not delay processing of 
the application and provision of benefits beyond the normal processing 
standards in Sec. 273.2(g).
    (ii) If a duplicate is found in making such a check, the duplication 
needs to be resolved in accordance with Sec. 273.2(f)(4)(iv) before the 
application can be processed and benefits provided. Delays in processing 
caused by this resolution shall be handled in accordance with 
Sec. 273.2(h).
    (3) State agencies shall develop follow-up procedures and corrective 
action requirements, including time frames within which action must be 
taken, to be applied to data obtained from matching for duplicate 
participation. Follow-up actions shall include, but not be limited to, 
the adjustment of benefits and eligibility, filing of claims, 
disqualification hearings, and referrals for prosecution, as 
appropriate.
    (4) FCS reserves the right to review State agencies' use of data 
obtained from matching for duplicate participation and may require State 
agencies to take additional specific action to ensure that such data is 
being used to protect Program integrity.
    (g) Hours of operation. State agencies shall be responsible for 
determining the hours that food stamp offices shall be open. At least 
once annually, State agencies shall review the hours of operation of 
food stamp offices to ensure that the needs of recipients who work, 
including issuance services operated at these offices, are adequately 
met. Based on the results of the reviews, State agencies may find it 
necessary to change the hours that food stamp offices are open to meet 
the needs of such recipients. The results of these reviews shall be 
retained at the State level for review by FCS.
    (h) Fraud detection units. State agencies shall establish and 
operate fraud detection units in all project areas in which 5,000 or 
more households participate in the Program. The fraud detection unit 
shall be responsible for detecting, investigating and assisting in the 
prosecution of Program fraud and need not be physically located in each 
5,000 household ``catchment area''. The workers fulfilling this function 
need not work full-time in fraud detection nor work exclusively on the 
Program. A written State agency procedure which systematically 
identifies and refers potential fraud cases to Investigators shall be 
considered a ``detection'' activity meeting the requirements of this 
section. The fraud detection function may be performed by persons not 
employed by the State agency.

[Amdt. 132, 43 FR 47884, Oct. 17, 1978, as amended by Amdt. 221, 47 FR 
35168, Aug. 13, 1982; Amdt. 211, 47 FR 53315, Nov. 26, 1982; Amdt. 237, 
47 FR 57668, 57669, Dec. 28, 1982; Amdt. 262, 49 FR 50597, Dec. 31, 
1984; 54 FR 7003, Feb. 15, 1989; 54 FR 24527, June 7, 1989; Amdt. 320, 
55 FR 6238, Feb. 22, 1990; Amdt. 371, 61 FR 60010, Nov. 26, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 272.5  Program informational activities.

    (a) Definition. ``Program informational activities'' are those 
activities that convey information about the Program, including 
household rights and responsibilities, through means such as 
publications, telephone hotlines, and face-to-face contacts.
    (b) Minimum requirements. State agencies shall comply with the 
following minimum information requirements for applicants and 
recipients.
    (1) Nutrition information. (i) FCS will supply State agencies with 
posters and pamphlets containing information regarding foods with 
substantial amounts of the recommended daily allowances of protein, 
minerals, and vitamins; menus making use of these foods; and the 
relationship between health and diet;
    (ii) Printed materials such as posters, fliers, and pamphlets, that 
explain the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants 
and Children (WIC) and, where available, the Commodity Supplemental Food 
Program (CSF) shall be supplied by agencies administering the WIC and 
CSF programs (where available);
    (iii) State agencies shall display the posters and make the 
pamphlets available at all food stamp and public assistance offices.
    (iv) State agencies shall encourage program participants to 
participate in the Expanded Food and Nutrition Education Program (EFNEP) 
and, wherever practicable, allow EFNEP personnel to come into food stamp 
offices to

[[Page 531]]

distribute informational materials and speak with food stamp recipients.
    (2) Rights and responsibilities. State agencies shall inform 
participant and applicant households of their Program rights and 
responsibilities. This information may be provided through whatever 
means the State agencies deem appropriate.
    (3) All Program informational material shall be available in 
languages other than English as required in Sec. 272.4(b) and shall 
include a statement that the Program is available to all without regard 
to race, color, sex, age, handicap, religious creed, national origin or 
political belief.
    (c) Program informational activities for low-income households. At 
their option State agencies may carry out and claim associated costs for 
Program informational activities designed to inform low-income 
households about the availablity, eligibility requirements, application 
procedures, and benefits of the Food Stamp Program. Program 
informational materials used in such activities shall be subject to 
Sec. 272.4(b), which pertains to bilingual requirements. Before FCS 
considers costs for such activities eligible for reimbursement at the 
fifty percent rate under part 277, State agencies shall obtain FCS 
approval for the attachment to their Plans of Operation as specified in 
Sec. 272.2(d)(1)(ix). In such attachments, State agencies shall describe 
the subject activities with respect to the socio-economic and 
demographic characteristics of the target population, types of media 
used, geographic areas warranting attention, and outside organizations 
which would be involved. State agencies shall update this attachment to 
their Plans of Operation when significant changes occur and report 
projected costs for this Program activity in accordance with Sec. 272.2 
(c), (e), and (f).

[Amdt. 207, 47 FR 52334, Nov. 19, 1982. Redesignated by Amdt. 211, 47 FR 
53316, Nov. 26, 1982; Amdt. 262, 49 FR 50597, Dec. 31, 1984; 52 FR 
36398, Sept. 29, 1987; 54 FR 24527, June 7, 1989; Amdt. 320, 55 FR 6239, 
Feb. 22, 1990]


<R05>
Sec. 272.6  Nondiscrimination compliance.

    (a) Requirement.  State agencies shall not discriminate against any 
applicant or participant in any aspect of program administration, 
including, but not limited to, the certification of households, the 
issuance of coupons, the conduct of fair hearings, or the conduct of any 
other program service for reasons of age, race, color, sex, handicap, 
religious creed, national origin, or political beliefs. Discrimination 
in any aspect of program administration is prohibited by these 
regulations, the Food Stamp Act, the Age Discrimination Act of 1975 
(Pub. L. 94-135), the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Pub. L. 93-112, 
section 504), and title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 
2000d). Enforcement action may be brought under any applicable Federal 
law. Title VI complaints shall be processed in accord with 7 CFR part 
15.
    (b) Right to file a complaint.  Individuals who believe that they 
have been subject to discrimination as specified in paragraph (a) of 
this section may file a written complaint with the Secretary or the 
Administrator, FCS, Washington, DC 20250, and/or with the State agency, 
if the State agency has a system for processing discrimination 
complaints. The State agency shall explain both the FCS and, if 
applicable, the State agency complaint system to each individual who 
expresses an interest in filing a discrimination complaint and shall 
advise the individual of the right to file a complaint in either or both 
systems.
    (c) FCS complaint requirements.  (1) Complaints shall contain the 
following information to facilitate investigations:
    (i) The name, address, and telephone number or other means of 
contacting the person alleging discrimination.
    (ii) The location and name of the organization or office which is 
accused of discriminatory practices.
    (iii) The nature of the incident or action or the aspect of program 
administration that led the person to allege discrimination.
    (iv) The reason for the alleged discrimination (age, race, color, 
sex, handicap, religious creed, national origin, or political belief).
    (v) The names, titles (if appropriate), and addresses of persons who 
may have knowledge of the alleged discriminatory acts.

[[Page 532]]

    (vi) The date or dates on which the alleged discriminatory actions 
occurred.
    (2) If a complainant makes allegations verbally and is unable or is 
reluctant to put the allegations in writing, the FCS employee to whom 
the allegations are made shall document the complaint in writing. Every 
effort shall be made by the individual accepting the complaint to have 
the complainant provide the information specified  in paragraph (c)(1) 
of this section.
    (3) Complaints will be accepted by the Secretary or the 
Administrator, FCS, even if the information specified in paragraph 
(c)(1) of this section is not complete. However, investigations will be 
conducted only if information concerning paragraphs (c)(1) (ii), (iii) 
or (iv) of this section is provided.
    (4) A complaint must be filed no later than 180 days from the date 
of the alleged discrimination. However, the time for filing may be 
extended by the Secretary.
    (d) State agency complaint requirements.  (1) The State agency may 
develop and use a State agency complaint system.
    (2) The State agency shall submit to FCS a report on each 
discrimination complaint processed at the State level. The report shall 
contain as much information in paragraph (c)(1) of this section as is 
available to the State agency, the findings of the investigation, and, 
if appropriate, the corrective action planned or taken.
    (e) Reviews. [Reserved]
    (f) Public notification.  The State agency shall: (1) Publicize the 
procedures described in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section, and, if 
applicable, the State agency's complaint procedures; (2) insure that all 
offices involved in administering the program and that also serve the 
public display the nondiscrimination poster provided by FCS; and (3) 
insure that participants and other low-income households have access to 
information regarding nondiscrimination statutes and policies, complaint 
procedures, and the rights of participants, within 10 days of the date 
of a request.
    (g) Data collection.  The State agency shall obtain data on 
households by racial/ethnic category. The racial/ethnic categories are: 
American Indian or Alaskan Native, Asian or Pacific Islander, black (not 
of Hispanic origin), Hispanic, and white (not of Hispanic origin). The 
State agency may request applicants to identify voluntarily their race 
or ethnicity on the application form. The application form in these 
States shall clearly indicate that the information is voluntary, that it 
will not affect eligibility or the level of benefits, and that the 
reason for the information is to assure that program benefits are 
distributed without regard to race, color, or national origin. The State 
agency shall develop alternative means of providing the racial and 
ethnic data on households, such as by observation during the interview, 
when the information is not voluntarily provided by the household on the 
application form.
    (h) Reports.  As required by FCS, the State agency shall report the 
racial/ethnic data on participating households on forms provided by FCS.

[Amdt. 132, 43 FR 47884, Oct. 17, 1979. Redesignated by Amdt. 211, 47 FR 
53315, Nov. 26, 1982, and amended by Amdt. 356, 59 FR 29713, June 9, 
1994]


<R05>
Sec. 272.7  Procedures for program administration in Alaska.

    (a) Purpose. To achieve the efficient and effective administration 
of the Food Stamp Program in rural areas of Alaska, FCS has determined 
that it is necessary to develop additional regulations which are 
specifically designed to accommodate the unique demographic and climatic 
characteristics which exist in these rural areas. The regulations 
established in this section, except for paragraph (f) of this section, 
shall apply only in those areas of Alaska designated as ``rural'' in 
paragraph (b) of this section. All regulations not specifically modified 
by this section shall remain in effect.
    (b) Area Designations. (1) Rural I Alaska TFP refers to a Thrifty 
Food Plan (TFP) that is the higher of the TFP that was in effect in each 
area on October 1, 1985, or 28.52 percent higher than the Anchorage TFP, 
as calculated by FCS, with rounding and other reductions that are 
appropriate. It is to be used in the following areas: In all places in 
Kodiak Island Borough with

[[Page 533]]

the exception of Kodiak; in all places in the Kenai Peninsula Borough 
that are west of Cook Inlet (including Tyonek, Kustatan, Kalgin Island, 
Iliamna, Chenik, and Augustine Island) and Chugach Island, English Bay, 
Port Graham, Portlock, Pt. Gore, Pye Island, and Seldovia. In the Yukon-
Koyukuk Census Area, the city of Nenana; and Skwentna in the Matanuska-
Susitna Borough. In the Valdez-Cordova Census Area, all places except 
Dayville and Valdez; and in the Southeast Fairbanks Census Area all 
places except Big Delta, Delta Junction, and Fort Greely. In the 
Skagway-Yakutat-Angoon Census Area, all places except Skagway; in Sitka 
Borough all places except Sitka; in the Wrangell-Petersburg Census Area, 
all places except Wrangell and Petersburg; in the Ketchikan Gateway 
Borough, all places except Ketchikan, Saxman, and Ward Cove; in the 
Prince of Wales-Outer Ketchikan Census Area, all places except Craig, 
Hyder, and Metlakatla.
    (2) Rural II Alaska TFP refers to a TFP that is 56.42 percent higher 
than the Anchorage TFP, as calculated by FCS, with rounding and other 
reductions that are appropriate. It is to be used in the following 
areas: North Slope Borough; Kobuk Census Area; Nome Census Area; Yukon-
Koyukuk Census Area except for the city of Nenana; Wade Hampton Census 
Area; Bethel Census Area; Denali in the Matanuska-Susitna Borough; 
Dillingham-Bristol Bay Borough; and in all places in the Aleutian 
Islands except for Cold Bay and Adak.
    (3) Urban Alaska TFP refers to a TFP that is the higher of the TFP 
that was in effect in each area on October 1, 1985, or .79 percent 
higher than the Anchorage TFP, as calculated by FCS, with rounding and 
other reductions that are appropriate. It is to be used in the following 
areas: Cold Bay and Adak in the Aleutian Islands; Kodiak in Kodiak 
Island Borough; Valdez and Dayville in the Valdez-Cordova Census Area; 
all places in Kenai Peninsula Borough that are on the Kenai Peninsula 
except for those specifically designated as Rural I; the entire 
Anchorage Borough; the entire Matanuska-Susitna Borough except for 
Denali and Skwentna; the entire Fairbanks-North Star Borough; the entire 
Juneau Borough; the entire Haines Borough; Sitka in the Sitka Borough; 
Skagway in the Skagway-Yakutat-Angoon Census Area; Wrangell and 
Petersburg in the Wrangell-Petersburg Census Area; Ketchikan, Saxman, 
and Ward Cove in the Ketchikan-Gateway Borough; Craig, Hyder, and 
Metlakatla in the Prince of Wales-Outer Ketchikan Census Area; and Big 
Delta, Delta Junction, and Fort Greely in the Southeast-Fairbanks Census 
Area.
    (4) The State agency may, in consultation with FCS, change the 
designation of any Alaska subdivision contained in the Plan of Operation 
to reflect changes in demographics or the cost of food within the 
subdivision.
    (c) Fee agents. ``Fee agent'' means a paid agent who, on behalf of 
the State, is authorized to make applications available to low-income 
households, assist in the completion of applications, conduct required 
interviews, secure required verification, forward completed applications 
and supporting documentation to the State agency, and provide other 
services as required by the State agency. Such services shall not 
include making final decisions on household eligibility or benefit 
levels.
    (d) Application processing. The State agency may modify the 
application processing requirements in Sec. 273.2 of this chapter as 
necessary to insure prompt delivery of services to eligible households. 
The following restrictions apply:
    (1) Fee agent processing. If the signed application is first 
submitted by a household to a fee agent, the fee agent shall mail the 
application to the State agency within 5 days of receipt. The fee agent 
shall give the household the maximum amount of time to provide needed 
verification as long as the five-day processing period is met.
    (2) Application filing date. An application is considered filed for 
purposes of timely processing when it is received by an office of the 
State agency.
    (3) Application processing timeframes. Eligible households must be 
provided an opportunity to participate as soon as possible but no later 
than 30 days after the application is received by an office of the State 
agency.

[[Page 534]]

    (4) Expedited service. (i) If the signed application is first 
submitted by a household to a fee agent, the fee agent shall mail the 
application to the State agency within 5 days of receipt. If the 
household is eligible for expedited service, the State agency will mail 
the coupons no later than the close of business of the second working 
day following the date the application was received by the State agency.
    (ii) If the signed application is submitted directly to the State 
agency in person by a rural resident or its authorized representative or 
by mail, the State agency shall process the application and issue 
coupons to households eligible for expedited service in accordance with 
the time standards contained in Sec. 273.2(i)(3) of this chapter.
    (iii) If an incomplete application is submitted directly to the 
State agency by mail, the State agency shall conduct the interview by 
the first working day following the date the application was received if 
the fee agent can contact the household or the household can be reached 
by telephone or radio-phone and does not object to this method of 
interviewing on grounds of privacy. Based on information obtained during 
the interview, the State agency shall complete the application and 
process the case. Because of the mailing time in rural areas, the State 
agency shall not return the completed application to the household for 
signature. The processing standard shall be calculated from the date the 
application was filed.
    (5) SSI Joint Processing. SSA workers shall mail all jointly 
processed applications to the appropriate State agency office within 5 
days of receipt of the application. A jointly processed application 
shall be considered filed for purposes of timely processing when it is 
received by an office of the State agency. The household, if determined 
eligible, shall receive benefits retroactive to the first day of the 
month in which the jointly processed application was received by the SSA 
worker.
    (6) Interviews. The State agency shall interview applicant 
households in the most efficient manner possible, either by face-to-face 
contact, telephone, radiophone, or other means of correspondence 
including written correspondence. In instances in which an interview 
cannot be conducted, the State agency may postpone the interview until 
after the household is certified.
    (e) Determining household eligibility and benefit level. If a 
household submits its application to a fee agent, it shall, if eligible, 
receive benefits retroactive to the date the application is received by 
the fee agent. If a household submits its application directly to a 
State agency office, it shall, if determined eligible, receive benefits 
retroactive to the date the application is received by the State agency.
    (f) Vehicles. In areas of the State where there are no licensing 
requirements, snowmobiles and boats used by the household for basic 
transportation shall be evaluated in accordance with Sec. 273.8(h) of 
this chapter even though they are unlicensed. Vehicles necessary for 
subsistence hunting and fishing shall not be counted as a household 
resource.
    (g) Reporting changes. The State agency shall allow the household to 
choose to report changes either directly to the State agency or to the 
fee agent. If the household reports the change to the fee agent, the fee 
agent will mail the change report to the State agency office within two 
working days of the date of receipt. The household's obligation to 
report the change will have been met if it submits the change to the fee 
agent within 10 days of the date the change becomes known to the 
household. However, for purposes of State agency action for increasing 
or decreasing benefits, the change will be considered to have been 
reported when it is received by a State agency office.
    (h) Fair hearings, fraud hearings, and agency conferences. The State 
agency shall conduct fair hearings, administrative fraud hearings, and 
agency conferences with households that wish to contest denial of 
expedited service in the most efficient manner possible, either by face-
to-face contact, telephone, radiophone, or other means of correspondence 
including written correspondence, in order to meet the respective time 
standards contained in Sec. 273.15 and Sec. 273.16 of this chapter.
    (i) Issuance services. With the approval of FCS, coupons may be 
mailed

[[Page 535]]

on a quarterly or semiannual basis to certain rural areas of Alaska when 
provisions are not available on a monthly basis. The decision to allow 
the distribution of coupons in this manner will be made on an annual 
basis. These areas shall be listed in the State's Plan of Operation. The 
State agency shall advise households that live in rural areas where 
quarterly or semiannual allotments are authorized. If, as the result of 
the issuance of quarterly or semiannual allotments, food coupons are 
overissued or underissued, the State agency shall process claim 
determinations and restore lost benefits.

[Amdt. 162, 45 FR 73003, Nov. 4, 1980, as amended by Amdt. 202, 46 FR 
44722, Sept. 4, 1981; Amdt. 215, 47 FR 20741, May 14, 1982. Redesignated 
and amended by Amdt. 211, 47 FR 53315, 53316, Nov. 26, 1982]

    Editorial Note: For other Federal Register citations affecting 
Sec. 272.7, see the List of CFR Sections Affected appearing in the 
Finding Aids section of this volume.


<R05>
Sec. 272.8  State income and eligibility verification system.

    (a) General. (1) State agencies shall maintain and use an income and 
eligibility verification system (IEVS), as specified in this section. By 
means of the IEVS, State agencies shall request wage and benefit 
information from the agencies identified in this paragraph and use that 
information in verifying eligibility for and the amount of food stamp 
benefits due to eligible households. Such information shall be requested 
and used with respect to all household members, including any considered 
excluded household members as specified in Sec. 273.11(c) whenever the 
SSNs of such excluded household members are available to the State 
agency. If not otherwise documented, State agencies shall obtain written 
agreements from these information provider agencies that they shall not 
record any information about individual food stamp households and that 
staff in those agencies are subject to the disclosure restrictions of 
Sec. 272.1(c). The wage and benefit information and agencies are:
    (i) Wage information maintained by the State Wage Information 
Collection Agency (SWICA);
    (ii) Information about net earnings from self-employment, wages, and 
payments of retirement income maintained by the Social Security 
Administration (SSA) and available pursuant to section 6103(1)(7)(A) of 
the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Code; and Federal retirement, and 
survivors, disability, SSI and related benefit information available 
from SSA;
    (iii) Unearned income information from the IRS available pursuant to 
section 6103(1)(7)(B) of the IRS Code; and
    (iv) Claim information from the agency administering Unemployment 
Insurance Benefits (UIB) and any information in addition to information 
about wages and UIB available from the agency which is useful for 
verifying eligibility and benefits, subject to the provisions and 
limitations of section 303(d) of the Social Security Act.
    (2) State agencies shall exchange with State agencies administering 
certain other programs in the IEVS information about food stamp 
households' circumstances which may be of use in establishing or 
verifying eligibility or benefit amounts under the Food Stamp Program 
and those programs. State agencies may exchange such information with 
these agencies in other States when they determine that the same 
objectives are likely to be met. These programs are:
    (i) The Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC);
    (ii) Medicaid;
    (iii) Unemployment Compensation (UC);
    (iv) Food Stamps; and
    (v) Any State program administered under a plan approved under title 
I, X, or XIV (the adult categories), or title XVI of the Social Security 
Act.
    (3) State agencies shall provide information to people administering 
the Child Support Program (title IV-D of the Social Security Act) and 
titles II (Federal Old Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance 
Benefits) and XVI (Supplemental Security Income for the Aged, Blind, and 
Disabled) of the Social Security Act.
    (4) Agreements. (i) Prior to requesting or exchanging information 
with other agencies, State agencies shall execute data exchange 
agreements with those agencies. The agreements shall specify

[[Page 536]]

the information to be exchanged and the procedures which will be used in 
the exchange of information. These agreements shall be part of the State 
agency's Plan of Operation, as required by paragraph (i) of this 
section. These agreements shall cover at least the following areas:
    (A) Identification of positions of all agency officials with 
authority to request wage information;
    (B) Methods and timing of the requests for any types of information, 
including the formats to be used;
    (C) The safeguards limiting release or redisclosure as required by 
Federal or State law or regulation as discussed in Sec. 272.1(c) and as 
may be required by other guidelines published by the Secretary; and
    (D) Reimbursement agreements, as appropriate, including new 
developmental costs associated with the furnishing of data.
    (ii) Agreements with SWICA's and agencies providing UIB data shall 
specify State agency access no less frequently than twice a month for 
applicants.
    (5) Uses of data. The State agency shall use information obtained by 
means of the IEVS for the purposes of:
    (i) Verifying a household's eligibility;
    (ii) Verifying the proper amount of benefits;
    (iii) Investigating to determine whether participating households 
received benefits to which they were not entitled; and
    (iv) Obtaining information which will be used in conducting criminal 
or civil prosecutions based on receipt of food stamp benefits to which 
participating households were not entitled.
    (b) State wage information. The wage information maintained by a 
SWICA which is not a UC agency or which is a UC agency but does not use 
wage data for determining UIB shall:
    (1) Contain the Social Security Number (SSN), the last name, wages 
earned for the period of the report for each employee, and an identifier 
of the employer such as name and address;
    (2) Include all employers covered by the State's UC law;
    (3) Be accumulated by employers for no longer periods than calendar 
quarters and be reported by employers to the SWICA within 30 days of the 
end of each quarter;
    (4) Be machine readable; and
    (5) Be accessible to agencies in other States which have executed 
agreements as required in paragraph (a)(4) of this section and to the 
Social Security Administration as specified in paragraph (a)(3) of this 
section for verifying eligibility and benefits under tities II and XVI 
of the Social Security Act.
    (c) Alternate data sources. The Secretary may, upon a State agency's 
application which is included in the attachment to the Plan of Operation 
specified in paragraph (i) of this section, permit a State agency to 
request and use income information from an alternate source or sources 
in order to meet any requirement of paragraph (a) of this section. The 
application shall document that the alternate source or sources provides 
accurate and timely information that is as useful for verifying 
eligibility and benefit amounts. State agencies shall comply with the 
requirements specified in paragraph (a) of this section unless this 
application for an alternate source has been approved. The Secretary 
shall consult with the Secretary of the Department of Health and Human 
Services and with the Secretary of the Department of Labor prior to 
approval of any alternate data source.
    (d) Form of data requests and exchanges. Requests for wage and 
benefit information and exchanges of eligibility and benefit information 
with the programs specified in paragraph (a) of this section shall be in 
the standardized formats established by the Secretary of Health and 
Human Services (in consultation with the Secretary) and required by the 
Secretary for SWICA, UC and other States, and in the formats prescribed 
by the Commissioners of SSA and IRS for SSA and IRS requests.
    (e) Requesting and using information for applicants. State agencies 
shall request and use information about members of all applicant 
households as specified below.
    (1) Information shall be requested at the next available opportunity 
after the date of application even if the applicant household has been 
determined eligible by that time. Information

[[Page 537]]

about members of applicant households who cannot provide SSNs at 
application shall be requested at the next available opportunity after 
the State agency is notified of their SSN's. Information received within 
the 30-day application period shall be used to determine household 
eligibility and benefits, if the information is received timely enough 
that it can be used for that determination. However, State agencies 
shall make eligibility and benefit determinations without waiting for 
receipt of IEVS data so as to comply with the promptness standard of 
Sec. 273.2(g). Information received from a source after an eligibility 
determination has been made shall be used as specified in paragraphs (f) 
and (g) of this section.
    (2) Information from the SWICA, from SSA and IRS, and claim 
information from the agency administering UIB shall be requested and 
used as specified in paragraph (e)(1) of this section. Requests to 
SWICAs shall access the most recent SWICA data available. Requests to 
SSA and IRS shall be submitted according to procedures specified by the 
respective Commissioners of those organizations.
    (3) Any information other than wage and UIB which UC agencies may 
have and which State agencies determine would be useful in verifying 
eligibility or benefits of applicant households shall be requested by 
methods and at intervals to which State agencies and UC agencies agree 
and shall be used as specified in paragraph (e)(1) of this section; and
    (4) Exchanges of information about applicant households with other 
programs specified in paragraph (a) of this section shall be made as the 
State agency and other programs may agree.
    (f) Requesting information about recipients. Except as provided in 
paragraph (f)(7) of this section, with respect to all members of 
recipient households State agencies shall:
    (1) Request information from the SWICA quarterly, such requests 
including all households which participated in any month of the quarter;
    (2) Request information about household members from SSA data bases 
no later than the second month of the certification period, when 
requests at application did not establish automatic reporting to the 
State agency of changes in SSA data. Requests shall be submitted 
according to procedures specified by the Commissioner of SSA;
    (3) Request information from IRS annually for all current 
recipients. Requests shall be submitted to IRS according to procedures 
specified by the Commissioner of IRS;
    (4) Exchange information with other programs specified in paragraph 
(a) of this section as the State agency and these other programs may 
agree;
    (5) Request information about Unemployment Insurance Benefits (UIB) 
from the agency administering that program as follows:
    (i) For all household members about whom requests at application 
indicate no receipt of UIB, information shall be requested for the three 
months subsequent to the month of application or until the receipt of 
UIB is reported, whichever is earlier;
    (ii) For all household members who report a loss of employment, 
information shall be requested for the three months subsequent to the 
month the loss is reported or until the receipt of UIB is reported, 
whichever is earlier; and
    (iii) For all household members receiving UIB, information shall be 
requested monthly until UIB are exhausted; and
    (6) Request from UC agencies any information other than UIB 
information which State agencies determine would be useful in verifying 
eligibility or benefits of recipient households. Requests shall be made 
by methods and at intervals to which the State agencies and the UC 
agencies agree.
    (7) Under certain conditions State agencies may exclude from the 
requests for information specified in this paragraph those members of 
recipient households who are participating in one of the other programs 
listed in paragraph (a)(2) of this section. The conditions for such 
exclusion are that:
    (i) The agency responsible for administering such other program is 
requesting and acting on information on food stamp recipients who are 
participating in that program as required by the pertinent regulations 
for that program,

[[Page 538]]

including any concerning selective criteria for information items for 
follow-up action;
    (ii) The other program agency agrees to inform the State agency of 
the information obtained from its follow-up action when that action 
discovers discrepancies between actual circumstances of food stamp 
recipients and circumstances known by the other program agency;
    (iii) The other program agency agrees to make available, upon the 
request of the State agency, information items about food stamp 
recipients which it did not follow up on; and
    (iv) The follow-up action taken by the other program agency is at 
least as beneficial as such action by the State agency.
    (g) Actions on recipient households. With respect to information 
items received as a result of requests made according to paragraph (f) 
of this section, State agencies shall initiate and pursue action 
according to the attachment to the Plan of Operation specified in 
paragraph (i) of this section.
    (1) State agency action on information items about recipient 
households shall include:
    (i) Review of the information and comparison of it to case record 
information;
    (ii) For all new or previously unverified information received, 
contact with the households and/or collateral contacts to resolve 
discrepancies as specified in Secs. 273.2(f)(4)(iv) and 273.2(f)(9)(iii) 
and (iv); and
    (iii) If discrepancies warrant reducing benefits or terminating 
eligibility, notices of adverse action.
    (2) State agencies shall initiate and pursue the actions specified 
in paragraph (g)(1) of this section so that the actions are completed 
within 45 days of receipt of the information items. Actions may be 
completed later than 45 days from the receipt of information items on no 
more than 20 percent of the information items if:
    (i) The only reason that the actions cannot be completed is the 
nonreceipt of verification requested from collateral contacts; and
    (ii) The actions are completed as specified in Sec. 273.12 when 
verification from a collateral contact is received or in conjunction 
with the next case action when such verification is not received, 
whichever is earlier.
    (3) When the actions specified in paragraph (g)(1) of this section 
substantiate an overissuance, State agencies shall establish and take 
actions on claims as specified in Sec. 273.18.
    (4) State agencies shall use appropriate procedures to monitor the 
timeliness requirements in paragraph (g)(2) of this section.
    (5) Except for the claims actions specified in paragraph (g)(3) of 
this section, under the conditions of paragraph (f)(7) of this section, 
State agencies may exclude from the actions required in paragraph (g) of 
this section information items pertaining to household members who are 
participating in one of the other programs listed in paragraph (a)(2) of 
this section.
    (h) IEVS information and quality control. The requirements of this 
section do not relieve the State agency of its responsibility for 
determining erroneous payments and/or its liability for such payments as 
specified in part 275 of this title (which pertains to quality control) 
and in guidelines on quality control established under that part. State 
agencies shall make available to quality control reviewers information 
items which are not selected for follow-up action because of the use of 
targeting methods specified in paragraph (i)(3) of this section 
including any information items not selected by other program agencies 
as provided in paragraph (i)(3)(iii)(C).
    (i) State Plan of Operation. The requirements for the IEVS specified 
in this section shall be included in an attachment to the State Plan of 
Operation as required in Sec. 272.2(d). This document shall include:
    (1) A description of procedures used, and agreements with the other 
agencies and programs specified in paragraph (a) of this section, 
including steps taken to meet requirements of limiting disclosure and 
safeguarding of information obtained from food stamp households and 
third parties as specified in Sec. 272.1;
    (2) Any of the material concerning alternate data sources as 
specified in paragraph (c) of this section;

[[Page 539]]

    (j) Reports and documentation. (1) The agency shall report as the 
Secretary prescribes for determining compliance with these regulations 
and evaluating the effectiveness of the income and eligibility 
verification system.
    (2) The State agency shall document as required by Sec. 273.2(f)(6) 
its use of information obtained through the IEVS both when an adverse 
action is and is not initiated.

[Amdt. 264, 51 FR 7204, Feb. 28, 1986, as amended at 53 FR 2822, Feb. 2, 
1988; Amdt. 356, 59 FR 29713, June 9, 1994]

    Effective Date Note: At 53 FR 2822, Feb. 2, 1988, Sec. 272.8, was 
amended by revising paragraph (f) introductory text, adding (f)(7), 
revising (g), adding a sentence to the end of (h) and revising (i) and 
(j)(1), effective in part upon approval by the Office of Management and 
Budget. Paragraphs (i)(3) and (4) and (j)(1) are published below and 
will become effective upon publication of a notice in the Federal 
Register.
Sec. 272.8  State income and eligibility verification system.

                                * * * * *

    (i) * * *
    (3) For each of the data sources specified in paragraphs (c) and (f) 
of this section, a separate description of how the State agency will 
select (target) information items for the actions specified in paragraph 
(g)(1) of this section. The description shall:
    (i) Describe the targeting method which will be used including such 
details as: What selective criteria (thresholds) are used, including 
(when feasible) assurances that the most cost-beneficial data are 
targeted in instances of redundancy across data sources; what program 
standards and/or information about households are used, if any; whether 
the criteria are applied on the basis of individual or groups of 
information items, and about individual household members or households; 
and whether the criteria are applied before any follow-up action 
specified in paragraph (g) of this section are initiated or are applied 
as part of the comparison of match results to casefile information;
    (ii) State the approximate number of information items which will be 
acted on and the approximate percentage that that number is of the 
number of information items received;
    (iii) Include a sufficiently comprehensive and detailed cost-benefit 
analysis to justify the targeting method. If the State agency will 
follow-up on all information items received, it shall certify in its 
Plan of Operation that it performed an analysis which showed that 100 
percent follow up is cost beneficial. If the targeting method will 
select certain information items for follow up, the justification shall 
show that following up on more information items than selected would not 
be cost-beneficial.
    (A) Total costs shall include both the Federal and State share of 
administrative costs. The elements of the total costs shall be limited 
to the costs of targeting and follow-up action. The justification shall 
include an estimate of the cost per follow-up action. No costs for any 
developmental, start-up and other one-time costs or indirect ongoing 
costs shall be included.
    (B) Total benefits shall include such quantifiable factors as the 
amounts of collections on claims established because of IEVS-obtained 
information, and the amounts of overissuances and the total of Federal 
and State administrative costs avoided due to terminating participation 
and reducing benefits.
    (C) As provided in paragraphs (f)(7) and (g)(5) of this section, the 
State agency may exclude household members from match requests or 
exclude information items about them from follow up. If the State agency 
wants to make either of such exclusions, in its cost-benefit 
justification it shall provide certain information. First, the State 
agency shall identify the program involved and state that the agency 
responsible for administering the program meets the conditions of 
paragraphs (f)(7)(i), (ii) and (iii) of this section. Second, the State 
agency shall summarize the methods for targeting, or for otherwise 
selecting information items for follow-up action, used by the other 
program agency as required in paragraph (f)(7)(i) of this section. In 
that summary, the State agency shall explain why those actions are at 
least as beneficial as the action which the State agency would take to 
comply with paragraph (g) of this section. The summary shall be based on 
the State agency's review of the description of the targeting or other 
selection methods as provided by the other program agency; and
    (4) The State agency shall submit revisions to the attachment as 
warranted by information in the annual report required in paragraph 
(j)(l) of this section.
    (j) Reports and documentation. (1) The State agency shall annually 
assess the targeting aspects of its IEVS specified in paragraph (i)(3) 
of this section and shall report that assessment to FCS. Such reports 
shall cover a Federal Fiscal Year (October 1 through September 30) and 
are due to the appropriate FCS Regional Office by December 31 following 
the particular Fiscal Year. In the reports the State agency shall 
provide the following information about its targeting activities 
separately for each data source:
    (i) The actual number of information items acted on and the 
percentage that that number is of the number of items received;

[[Page 540]]

    (ii) A summary of any significant operational events and patterns in 
targeting, and any consequent changes made or planned in such areas as 
automated data processing and targeting methods; and
    (iii) Any change to the cost-benefit justification which is required 
by paragraph (i)(3) of this section.


<R05>
Sec. 272.9  Approval of homeless meal providers.

    The State food stamp agency, or another appropriate State or local 
governmental agency identified by the State food stamp agency, shall 
approve establishments serving the homeless upon sufficient evidence, as 
determined by the agency, that the establishment does in fact serve 
meals to homeless persons. Where the State food stamp agency identifies 
another appropriate State or local agency for the purpose of approving 
establishments serving the homeless, the State food stamp agency will 
remain responsible for insuring that the provisions of the preceding 
sentence are effectively carried out. The State food stamp agency, or 
another appropriate State or local governmental agency identified by the 
State food stamp agency or private nonprofit organization under contract 
with the State food stamp agency shall execute contracts with 
restaurants wishing to sell meals in exchange for food stamp benefits to 
homeless food stamp households. Such contracts shall specify that such 
meals are to be sold at ``concessional'' (low or reduced) prices and 
shall also specify the approximate prices which will be charged, or the 
amount and type of price reduction.

[56 FR 54777, Oct. 23, 1991; 61 FR 53600, Oct. 15, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 272.10  ADP/CIS Model Plan.

    (a) General purpose and content--(1) Purpose. All State agencies are 
required to sufficiently automate their food stamp program operations 
and computerize their systems for obtaining, maintaining, utilizing and 
transmitting information concerning the food stamp program. Sufficient 
automation levels are those which result in effective programs or in 
cost effective reductions in errors and improvements in management 
efficiency, such as decreases in program administrative costs. Thus, for 
those State agencies which operate exceptionally efficient and effective 
programs, a lesser degree of automation may be considered sufficient 
than in other State agencies. In order to determine a sufficient level 
of automation in each State, each State agency shall develop an ADP/CIS 
plan. FCS may withhold State agency funds under Sec. 276.4(a) for 
failure to submit an ADP/CIS plan in accordance with the deadlines for 
submission, for failure to make appropriate changes in their ADP/CIS 
plan within 60 days of their receipt of FCS comments, or for failure to 
implement the approved ADP/CIS plan in accordance with the dates 
specified therein, unless extensions of time or deviations from the plan 
or schedules have been approved by FCS.
    (2) Content. In developing their ADP/CIS plans, State agencies shall 
use one of the following three formats:
    (i) State agencies which are sufficiently automated in each area 
specified in Sec. 272.10(b) may provide a single certification statement 
that they are sufficiently automated in each area.
    (ii) State agencies which are sufficiently automated in some, but 
not all, areas specified in Sec. 272.10(b) shall submit an ADP/CIS plan 
which consists of two parts. The first part would be the State agency's 
certification as to the areas in which they are sufficiently automated. 
The second part would describe the areas of Sec. 272.10(b) which the 
State agency has not automated or, in its opinion, has not automated 
sufficiently and include the State agency's plans for sufficiently 
automating these areas. State agencies shall include a description of 
how they intend to automate each area and a timetable for each planned 
activity, including a consideration of transfers as discussed in 
paragraph (a)(3) of this section. State agencies which are not planning 
to automate each of the areas specified Sec. 272.10(b) or which are not 
already automated in these areas shall provide justification. Any such 
justification shall include a cost-effectiveness analysis.
    (iii) State agencies which are not sufficiently automated in any of 
the areas specified in Sec. 272.10(b) shall submit an ADP/CIS plan which 
describes their plans for sufficiently automating each

[[Page 541]]

area, including a timetable for each planned activity, and including a 
consideration of transfers as discussed in paragraph (a)(3) of this 
section. State agencies which are not planning to automate each of the 
areas specified in Sec. 272.10(b) or which are not, in their opinion, 
sufficiently automated in these areas shall provide justification. Any 
such justification shall include a cost-effectiveness analysis.
    (3) Transfers. (i) State agencies planning additional automation 
shall consult with other State agencies and with the appropriate 
Regional Office to determine whether a transfer or modification of an 
existing system from another jurisdiction would be more efficient and 
cost effective than the development of a new system. In assessing the 
practicability of a transfer, State agencies should consult with other 
State agencies that have similar characteristics such as whether they 
are urban or rural, whether they are county or State administered, the 
geographic size of the States and the size of the caseload.
    (ii) State agencies that plan to automate operations using any 
method other than transfers will need to be able to justify why they are 
not using transfers. The justification will need to include the results 
of the consultations with other State agencies, the relative costs of 
transfer and the system the State agency plans to develop, and the 
reasons for not using a transfer. Common reasons for not using transfers 
include: The State agency is required to use a central data processing 
facility and the (otherwise) transferable system is incompatible with 
it; the State agency's data base management software is incompatible 
with the transferable system; the State agency's ADP experts are not 
familiar with the software/hardware used by the transferable system and 
acquiring new expertise would be expensive; the transferable system is 
interactive or uses ``generic'' caseworkers, the receiving State agency 
does not and it would be expensive to modify the existing system and/or 
procedures; and transfer would provoke disputes with the State agency's 
personnel union. State agencies that cite any of these reasons shall not 
automatically receive approval to develop non-transferred systems. State 
agencies shall show what efforts were considered to overcome the 
problems and that those efforts are cost ineffective. This justification 
will need to be included as part of the Advance Planning Document that 
the State agency must submit for approval of its proposed system.
    (iii) FCS will assist State agencies that request assistance in 
determining what other States have systems that should be considered as 
possible transfers.
    (b) Model Plan. In order to meet the requirements of the Act and 
ensure the efficient and effective administration of the program, a food 
stamp system, at a minimum, shall be automated in each of the following 
program areas in paragraphs (b)(1), Certification, and (b)(2), Issuance 
Reconciliation and Reporting of this section. The food stamp system must 
further meet all the requirements in paragraph (b)(3), General, of this 
section.
    (1) Certification. (i) Determine eligibility and calculate benefits 
or validate the eligibility worker's calculations by processing and 
storing all casefile information necessary for the eligibility 
determination and benefit computation (including but not limited to all 
household members' names, addresses, dates of birth, social security 
numbers, individual household members' earned and unearned income by 
source, deductions, resources and household size). Redetermine or 
revalidate eligibility and benefits based on notices of change in 
households' circumstances;
    (ii) Identify other elements that affect the eligibility of 
household members such as alien status, presence of an elderly person in 
the household, status of periodic work registration, disqualification 
actions, categorical eligibility, and employment and training status;
    (iii) Provide for an automatic cutoff of participation for 
households which have not been recertified at the end of their 
certification period;
    (iv) Notify the certification unit (or generate notices to 
households) of cases requiring Notices of:
    (A) Case Disposition,

[[Page 542]]

    (B) Adverse Action and Mass Change, and
    (C) Expiration;
    (v) Prior to certification, crosscheck for duplicate cases for all 
household members by means of a comparison with food stamp records 
within the relevant jurisdiction;
    (vi) Meet the requirements of the IEVS system of Sec. 272.8. 
Generate information, as appropriate, to other programs.
    (vii) Provide the capability to effect mass changes: Those initiated 
at the State level, as well as those resulting from changes at the 
Federal level (eligibility standards, allotments, deductions, utility 
standards, SSI, AFDC, SAA benefits);
    (viii) Identify cases where action is pending or follow-up must be 
pursued, for example, households and verification pending or households 
containing disqualified individuals or a striker;
    (ix) Calculate or validate benefits based on restored benefits or 
claims collection, and maintain a record of the changes made;
    (x) Store information concerning characteristics of all household 
members;
    (xi) Provide for appropriate Social Security enumeration for all 
required household members; and
    (xii) Provide for monthly reporting and retrospective budgeting as 
required.
    (2) Issuance, reconciliation and reporting. (i) Generate 
authorizations for benefits in issuance systems employing ATP's, direct 
mail, or online issuance and store all Household Issuance Record (HIR) 
information including: name and address of household, household size, 
period of certification, amount of allotment, case type (PA or NA), name 
and address of authorized representative, and racial/ethnic data;
    (ii) Prevent a duplicate HIR from being established for presently 
participating or disqualified households;
    (iii) Allow for authorized under- or over-issuance due to claims 
collection or restored benefits;
    (iv) Provide for reconciliation of all transacted authorization 
documents to the HIR masterfile. This process must incorporate any 
manually-issued authorization documents, account for any replacement or 
supplemental authorization documents issued to a household, and identify 
cases of unauthorized and duplicate participation;
    (v) Provide a mechanism allowing for a household's redemption of 
more than one valid authorization document in a given month;
    (vi) Generate data necessary to meet Federal issuance and 
reconciliation reporting requirements, and provide for the eventual 
capability of directly transmitting data to FCS including:
    (A) Issuance:
    (1) FCS-259--Summary of mail issuance and replacement;
    (2) FCS-250--Reconciliation of redeemed ATPs with reported 
authorized coupon issuance.
    (B) Reconciliation: FCS-46--ATP Reconciliation Report.
    (vii) Generate data necessary to meet other reporting requirements 
and provide for the eventual capability of directly transmitting data to 
FCS, including:
    (A) FCS-101--Program participation by race;
    (B) FCS-209--Status of claims against households; and
    (C) FCS-388--Coupon issuance and participation estimates.
    (viii) Allow for sample selection for quality control reviews of 
casefiles, and for management evaluation reviews;
    (ix) Provide for program-wide reduction or suspension of benefits 
and restoration of benefits if funds later become available and store 
information concerning the benefit amounts actually issued;
    (x) Provide for expedited issuance of benefits within prescribed 
timeframes;
    (xi) Produce and store a participation history covering three (3) 
year(s) for each household receiving benefits.
    (xii) Provide for cutoff of benefits for households which have not 
been recertified timely; and
    (xiii) Provide for the tracking, aging, and collection of recipient 
claims and preparation of the FCS-209, Status of Claims Against 
Households report.
    (3) General. The following functions shall be part of an overall 
State agency system but need not necessarily be automated:

[[Page 543]]

    (i) All activities necessary to meet the various timeliness and data 
quality requirements established by FCS;
    (ii) All activities necessary to coordinate with other appropriate 
Federal and State programs, such as AFDC or SSI;
    (iii) All activities necessary to maintain the appropriate level of 
confidentiality of information obtained from applicant and recipient 
households;
    (iv) All activities necessary to maintain the security of automated 
systems to operate the Food Stamp Program;
    (v) Implement regulatory and other changes including a testing phase 
to meet implementation deadlines, generally within 90 days;
    (vi) Generate whatever data is necessary to provide management 
information for the State agency's own use, such as caseload, 
participation and actions data;
    (vii) Provide support as necessary for the State agency's management 
of Federal funds relative to Food Stamp Program administration, generate 
information necessary to meet Federal financial reporting requirements;
    (viii) Routine purging of case files and file maintenance, and
    (ix) Provide for the eventual direct transmission of data necessary 
to meet Federal financial reporting requirements.

[Amdt. 284, 52 FR 35226, Sept. 18, 1987, as amended by Amdt. 356, 59 FR 
29713, June 9, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 272.11  Systematic Alien Verification for Entitlements (SAVE) Program.

    (a) General. A State agency shall participate in the SAVE Program 
established by the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS), in 
order to verify the validity of documents provided by aliens applying 
for food stamp benefits with the central data files maintained by INS.
    (b) Agreements. (1) Prior to implementing the SAVE Program, the 
State agency shall execute an agreement with INS. The agreement shall 
specify the information to be exchanged and the procedures which will be 
used in the exchange of information.
    (2) The agreement shall cover at least the following areas:
    (i) Identification of positions of all agency officials with 
authority to request immigration status information;
    (ii) Identification and location of all SAVE access points covered 
by the agreement;
    (iii) For automated SAVE verification through access to the Alien 
Status Verification Index (ASVI), as outlined in paragraph (d)(1) of 
this section, a description of the access method and procedures;
    (iv) For secondary verification as described in paragraph (d)(2) of 
this section, the locations of INS District Offices to which 
verification requests will be directed;
    (v) The safeguards limiting release or redisclosure as required by 
State or Federal law or regulation as discussed in Sec. 272.1(c) and as 
may be required by other guidelines published by the Secretary; and
    (vi) Reimbursement or billing agreements for ongoing SAVE 
operational costs, as well as any developmental costs associated with 
establishing access to the ASVI database.
    (c) Use of data. The State agency shall use information obtained 
through the SAVE Program only for the purposes of:
    (1) Verifying the validity of documentation of alien status 
presented by an applicant;
    (2) Verifying an individual's eligibility for benefits;
    (3) Investigating whether participating households received benefits 
to which they were not entitled, if an individual was previously 
certified to receive benefits on the basis of eligible alien status; and
    (4) Assisting in or conducting administrative disqualification 
hearings, or criminal or civil prosecutions based on receipt of food 
stamp benefits to which participating households were not entitled.
    (d) Method of verification--(1) SAVE verification through ASVI 
access. (i) The State agency shall establish a method of accessing the 
Alien Status Verification Index (ASVI) database and shall attempt to 
verify the alien's documented status through this method before 
proceeding to secondary verification unless:

[[Page 544]]

    (A) The State agency has determined that the documentation presented 
is questionable; or
    (B) The State agency accepts documents that are not issued by the 
INS but are determined by the State agency to be reasonable evidence of 
the alien's immigration status.
    (ii) Methods of access to the ASVI may include:
    (A) Direct automated access through dedicated telecommunications, 
modem, point-of-sale terminal, telephone or other access device; or
    (B) Periodic file match.
    (iii) The State agency shall describe the methods of access in the 
attachment to the Plan of Operation and shall obtain prior approval from 
FCS as prescribed by Sec. 277.19 before obtaining equipment, supplies or 
services to establish such access.
    (iv) The State agency shall ensure that the method of access to the 
ASVI protects the individual's privacy to the maximum degree possible.
    (2) Secondary SAVE verification. The State agency may verify the 
documentation presented by an alien applicant by completing INS Form G-
845 and submitting photocopies of such documentation to the INS for 
verification as described in Sec. 272.2(f)(10). This secondary 
verification procedure shall be used by the State agency whenever the 
applicant-individual's documented alien status has not been verified 
through automated access to the ASVI as described in paragraph (d)(1) of 
this section or significant discrepancies exist between the data on the 
ASVI and the information provided by the alien applicant.
    (e) Plan of operation. (1) The requirements for participation in the 
SAVE Program shall be included in an attachment to the State agency's 
Plan of Operation as required in Sec. 272.2(d). This document shall 
include a description of procedures used, method of access and the 
agreement specified in paragraph (b) of this section, including steps 
taken to meet requirements of limiting disclosure and safeguarding of 
information obtained from food stamp households as specified in 
Sec. 272.1.
    (2) The State agency shall also submit as part of the plan a Budget 
Projection Statement (FCS-366A) which includes an estimate of costs for 
the implementation and operation of the SAVE Program, as outlined in 
Sec. 277.19(e). The State agency shall submit with the Budget Projection 
Statement a narrative justification of estimated costs as required in 
Sec. 272.2(c)(1)(i).

[53 FR 39440, Oct. 7, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 272.12   Intercept of unemployment compensation benefits.

    (a) General. State agencies may, at their option, arrange for the 
intercept of unemployment compensation (UC) benefits to collect claims 
for intentional Program violations as defined in Sec. 273.16(c). State 
agencies may not conduct such intercepts unless they have an FCS-
approved attachment to their Plan of Operation as required by 
Sec. 272.2(d)(l)(x). Acceptance of the intercept of UC method of 
collection is voluntary with each affected household.
    (b) Identification of households subject to the intercept. (1) State 
agencies which decide to use the intercept procedure shall, in the 
attachments to the Plan of Operations required by Sec. 272.2(d)(1)(x), 
specify if they will use the intercept for nonparticipating households 
only or for both nonparticipating and participating households. They 
shall also specify the type of case subject to UC intercept or the 
selection criteria for referral of households for intercept.
    (2) Upon request of the UC agency, State agencies may provide such 
agencies identifying casefile information about individuals subject to 
the intercept.
    (3) State agencies shall request that the UC agency provide the 
State agency the following information from UC files about any such 
individuals:
    (i) Whether the individual is receiving UC benefits;
    (ii) The amount of any such benefits; and
    (iii) The current (or most recent) home address of the individual.
    (c) Notice of intercept procedures. (1) State agencies shall notify 
households subject to the intercept pursuant to paragraph (b) of this 
section as follows:

[[Page 545]]

    (i) State agencies shall notify participating households of the UC 
intercept procedures with the initial demand letter sent in accordance 
with Sec. 273.18(d)(3). This letter shall explain to the households that 
it may use the intercept alone or in combination with other repayment 
methods, that use of the intercept is voluntary, and that the intercept 
is one of several repayment methods available to them;
    (ii) State agencies shall notify nonparticipating households which 
have failed to repay claims for intentional program violation of the 
intercept method unless the judicial action specified in paragraph (f) 
of this section will be taken without attempting to reach a voluntary 
agreement. Notices to nonparticipating households shall include a copy 
of the agreement described in paragraph (d) of this section and 
directions for contacting the State agency. If the State agency plans to 
initiate judicial process as described in paragraph (f) of this section 
against a household which does not voluntarily agree to the intercept, 
the notice shall advise such households that judicial action shall be 
initiated unless the household contacts the State agency within 10 days 
of receipt of the notice.
    (2) As part of the agreement with UC agencies described in paragraph 
(g) of this section, State agencies may arrange for UC agencies to 
provide UC claimants a notice of the intercept option with directions 
about how to contact the State agency for further information to be 
included on or with the application for UC benefits.
    (d) Agreements with individuals. State agencies may arrange with 
households for deductions from UC benefits by executing agreements with 
individual household members who receive UC benefits. Copies of 
agreements with individuals shall be provided to UC agencies as provided 
in paragraph (g) of this section. The agreements shall include:
    (1) The total amount to be deducted from UC benefits otherwise due;
    (2) The amount of UC benefits to be deducted each week;
    (3) The number of weeks the deduction will be made;
    (4) A statement that:
    (i) It is the individual's responsibility to notify the State agency 
if a change in the amount of the deduction is necessary, for example, 
because of a change of earnings or in other circumstances affecting 
income;
    (ii) The amount of a weekly deduction is a maximum which may be 
decreased if there are insufficient UC benefits to allow the full 
deduction and the number of weeks for the deduction may be 
correspondingly increased to complete collection; and
    (iii) The State agency will provide the individual a receipt for the 
total amount of deductions actually made;
    (5) The signature of the individual agreeing to the deductions; and
    (6) Either on the agreement or on a transmittal to the UC agency, a 
signature of a State agency official indicating concurrence with the 
agreement.
    (e) Amounts of deduction. The amount of the weekly deduction shall 
be determined by agreement between the individual and State agency, 
provided that for participating households the amount, in combination 
with any other repayment methods, shall result in a scheduled repayment 
rate no less than that which would be repaid through the allotment 
reduction prescribed in Sec. 273.18(g)(3). The determination of the 
amount shall take into account such factors as the total amount of the 
claim, the amount of weekly UC benefits and the number of weeks they are 
expected to be paid, other income available to the individual, and any 
other deductions from the individual's UC benefits, allowing priority to 
such mandatory deductions as those for child support payments required 
by the Social Security Act and recoveries of prior excess UC benefits.
    (f) Court-ordered deductions. State agencies may attempt to recover 
claims for intentional program violations from nonparticipating 
households by obtaining a writ, order, summons, or other similar process 
in the nature of garnishment from a court of competent jurisdiction to 
require the withholding of amounts from unemployment compensation. 
Subject to State and local law, State agencies may seek such judicial 
action before or after attempting to reach a voluntary agreement as 
described in paragraph (d) of this section.

[[Page 546]]

    (1) The State agency shall determine an amount to be withheld each 
week by considering as many of the factors listed in paragraph (e) of 
this section as it has knowledge of and shall recommend such amount to 
the court. The State agency shall notify the court of any mandatory 
deductions from an individual's UC benefits of which it has knowledge.
    (2) The State agency shall assure that any individual against whom a 
court-ordered deduction is sought is notified of:
    (i) The total amount to be deducted from UC benefits otherwise due;
    (ii) The amount of UC benefits to be deducted each week; and
    (iii) The number of weeks the deduction will be made.
    (3) The State agency shall provide the UC agency the information 
specified in paragraph (f)(1) of this section and a copy of the court 
order or a summary as the UC agency may request.
    (g) Agreement with UC agencies. State agencies using the procedures 
specified in this section shall execute written agreements with UC 
agencies, including UC agencies in other States when circumstances and 
experience indicate that would be useful. The agreements shall include:
    (1) The requirements specified in this section which affect both 
agencies, including the identifying information the State agency will 
provide, the frequency of and the procedures for exchanging information;
    (2) The particular costs, both initial and ongoing, which the State 
agency shall reimburse the UC agency. Such costs shall be limited to 
those attributable to the repayment of claims for intentional Program 
violations for which the State agency does not otherwise reimburse the 
UC agency; and
    (3) The frequency of transmittals of deductions from UC benefits to 
the State agency and of reports of amounts deducted for each individual 
and the total amount transmitted.

[Amdt. 320, 55 FR 6239, Feb. 22, 1990]


<R03>
PART 273--CERTIFICATION OF ELIGIBLE HOUSEHOLDS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
273.1  Household concept.
273.2  Application processing.
273.3  Residency.
273.4  Citizenship and alien status.
273.5  Students.
273.6  Social security numbers.
273.7  Work requirements.
273.8  Resource eligibility standards.
273.9  Income and deductions.
273.10  Determining household eligibility and benefit levels.
273.11  Action on households with special circumstances.
273.12  Reporting changes.
273.13  Notice of adverse action.
273.14  Recertification.
273.15  Fair hearings.
273.16  Disqualification for intentional Program violation.
273.17  Restoration of lost benefits.
273.18  Claims against households.
273.19  [Reserved]
273.20  SSI cash-out.
273.21  Monthly Reporting and Retrospective Budgeting (MRRB).
273.22  Optional workfare program.
273.23  Simplified application and standardized benefit projects.

    Authority: 7 U.S.C. 2011-2032.

    Editorial Note: OMB control numbers relating to this part 273 are 
contained in Sec. 271.8.


<R05>
Sec. 273.1  Household concept.

    (a) Household definition--(1) General definition. A household is 
composed of one of the following individuals or groups of individuals, 
provided they are not residents of an institution (except as otherwise 
specified in paragraph (e) of this section), are not residents of a 
commercial boarding house, or are not boarders (except as otherwise 
specified in paragraph (c) of this section):
    (i) An individual living alone;
    (ii) An individual living with others, but customarily purchasing 
food and preparing meals for home consumption separate and apart from 
others;
    (iii) A group of individuals who live together and customarily 
purchase food and prepare meals together for home consumption.
    (2) Special definition: (i) The following individuals living with 
others or groups of individuals living together shall be considered as 
customarily purchasing food and preparing meals together, even if they 
do not do so:
    (A) A spouse as defined in Sec. 271.2 of a member of the household;
    (B) A child under 22 years of age who is living with his or her 
natural, adoptive, or stepparents, unless the child is

[[Page 547]]

also living with his or her own child(ren) or spouse.
    (C) A child (other than a foster child) under 18 years of age who 
lives with and is under the parental control of a household member other 
than his or her parent. A child is considered to be under parental 
control for purposes of this provision if he or she is financially or 
otherwise dependent on a member of the household, except that a child 
who is living with his or her own child(ren) or spouse is not considered 
to be under parental control.
    (ii) Although a group of individuals living together and purchasing 
and preparing meals together constitutes a single household under the 
provisions of paragraph (a)(1)(iii) of this section, an otherwise 
eligible member of such a household who is 60 years of age or older and 
who is unable to purchase and prepare meals because he/she suffers from 
a disability considered permanent under the Social Security Act or 
suffers from a nondisease-related, severe, permanent disability may be 
considered, together with any of the others who is the spouse of the 
elderly and disabled individual, an individual household provided that 
the income (all income under Sec. 273.9(b)) of the others with whom the 
individual resides (excluding the income of the spouse of the elderly 
and disabled individual) does not exceed 165% of the poverty line.
    (b) Nonhousehold members. (1) For the purposes of defining a 
household under the provisions of paragraph (a)(1) of this section, the 
following individuals shall not be included as a member of the 
household, unless specifically included as a household member under the 
provisions of paragraph (a)(2) of this section. If not included as a 
member of the household under the provisions of paragraph (a)(2) of this 
section, such individuals shall not be included as a member of the 
household for the purpose of determining household size, eligibility, or 
benefit level. The income and resources of such individuals shall be 
handled in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 273.11(d). The 
following individuals (if otherwise eligible) may participate as 
separate households:
    (i) Roomers. Individuals to whom a household furnishes lodging, but 
not meals, for compensation.
    (ii) Live-in-attendants. Individuals who reside with a household to 
provide medical, housekeeping, child care or similar personal services.
    (iii) Others. Other individuals who share living quarters with the 
household but who do not customarily purchase food and prepare meals 
with the household. For example, if the applicant household shares 
living quarters with another family to save on rent, but does not 
purchase and prepare food together with that family, the members of the 
other family are not members of the applicant household.
    (2) Some household members are ineligible to receive Program 
benefits under the provisions of the Food Stamp Act (such as SSI 
recipients in cash-out States, certain aliens, and certain students). 
Others may become ineligible for such reasons as being disqualified for 
committing an intentional Program violation or refusing to comply with a 
regulatory requirement. These individuals shall be included as a member 
of the household for the purpose of defining a household under the 
provisions of paragraphs (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section. However, 
such individuals shall not be included as eligible members of the 
household when determining the household's size for the purpose of 
comparing the household's monthly income with the income eligibility 
standard or assigning a benefit level by household size. The income and 
resources of such individuals shall be handled in accordance with the 
provisions of Sec. 273.11 (c) or (d), as appropriate. These individuals 
are not eligible to participate as separate households. Ineligible 
individuals include the following:
    (i) Ineligible students. Individuals who do not meet the eligible 
student requirements of Sec. 273.5.
    (ii) Ineligible aliens. Individuals who do not meet the citizenship 
or eligible alien status requirements of Sec. 273.4(a) or the eligible 
sponsored alien requirements of Sec. 273.11(j).
    (iii) SSI recipients in ``cash-out'' States. Recipients of SSI 
benefits who reside in a State designated by the Secretary of Health and 
Human Services to have specifically included the value of the

[[Page 548]]

coupon allotments in its State supplemental payments.
    (iv) Intentional Program violation. Individuals disqualified for 
intentional Program violation, as set forth in Sec. 273.16.
    (v) SSN disqualified. Individuals disqualified for failure to 
provide an SSN, as set forth in Sec. 273.6. A completed SSA Form 2853 
shall be considered proof of application for an SSN for a newborn 
infant.
    (vi) Workfare sanctioned. Individuals against whom a sanction was 
imposed while they were participating in a household disqualified for 
failure to comply with workfare requirements set forth in Sec. 273.22.
    (vii) Persons disqualified for noncompliance with the work 
requirements of Sec. 273.7.
    (c) Boarders. (1) Boarders are defined as individuals or groups of 
individuals residing with others and paying reasonable compensation to 
the others for lodging and meals (excluding residents of a commercial 
boarding house). Boarders are ineligible to participate in the Program 
independent of the household providing the board. They may participate 
as members of the household providing the boarder services to them, at 
such household's request. In no event shall boarder status be granted to 
those individuals or groups of individuals described in paragraph (a)(2) 
of this section which includes children or siblings residing with 
elderly or disabled parents or siblings.
    (2) The household within which a boarder resides (including the 
household of the proprietor of a boarding house) may participate in the 
program if the household meets all the eligibility requirements for 
program participation.
    (3) To determine if an individual is paying reasonable compensation 
for meals and lodging in making a determination of boarder status, only 
the amount paid for meals shall be used, provided that the amount paid 
for meals is distinguishable from the amount paid for lodging. A 
reasonable monthly payment shall be either of the following:
    (i) Boarders whose board arrangement is for more than two meals a 
day shall pay an amount which equals or exceeds the maximum food stamp 
allotment for the appropriate size of the boarder household; or
    (ii) Boarders whose board arrangement is for two meals or less per 
day shall pay an amount which equals or exceeds two-thirds of the 
maximum food stamp allotment for the appropriate size of the boarder 
household.
    (4) An individual furnished both meals and lodging by a household 
but paying compensation of less than a reasonable amount to the 
household for such services shall be considered a member of the 
household providing the services.
    (5) None of the income or resources of individuals determined to be 
boarders and who are not members of the household providing the boarder 
services (as prescribed in paragraph (c)(3) of this section) shall be 
considered available to such household. However, the amount of the 
payment that a boarder gives to a household shall be treated as self-
employment income to the household. The procedures for handling self-
employment income from boarders (other than such income received by a 
household that owns and operates a commercial boarding house) are set 
forth in Sec. 273.11(b). The procedures for handling income from 
boarders by a household that owns and operates a commercial boarding 
household are set forth in Sec. 273.11(a). For Program purposes, a 
commercial boarding house is defined as an establishment licensed as an 
enterprise which offers meals and lodging for compensation. In project 
areas without licensing requirements, a commercial boarding house shall 
be defined as a commercial establishment which offers meals and lodging 
for compensation with the intent of making a profit. The number of 
boarders residing in a boarding house shall not be used to determine if 
a boarding house is a commercial enterprise.
    (6) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs (c)(1), (c)(2), and 
(c)(4) of this section, foster care individuals placed in the home of 
relatives or other individuals or families by a Federal, State, or local 
governmental foster care program, shall be considered boarders. The 
Federal, State, or local governmental, or court ordered, foster

[[Page 549]]

care payments received by the household for such foster care boarder 
shall not be considered as available income to the household and such 
payment is exempt from the computation of net self-employment income 
from boarders under the provisions of Sec. 273.11(b). Foster care 
boarders may participate in the Program as members of the household 
providing the boarder services to them, at such household's request. If 
the household chooses this option, foster care payments received by the 
household shall be considered unearned income to the household and 
counted in their entirety in determining the household's income 
eligibility and benefit level. The provisions of this paragraph (c)(6) 
do not apply to individuals qualified to participate in the Program 
under paragraph (e) of this section.
    (d) Head of household. (1) A State agency shall not use the head of 
household designation to impose special requirements on the household, 
such as requiring that the head of household, rather than another 
responsible member of the household, appear at the certification office 
to make application for benefits. When designating the head of 
household, the State agency shall allow the household to select an adult 
parent of children (of any age) living in the household, or an adult who 
has parental control over children (under 18 years of age) living in the 
household, as the head of household provided that all adult household 
members agree to the selection. The State agency shall permit such 
households to select their head at each certification action or whenever 
there is a change in household composition. The State agency shall 
provide written notice to all households at the time of application and 
as otherwise appropriate that specifies the household's right to select 
its head of household in accordance with this paragraph. The written 
notice shall identify which households have the option to select their 
head of household, the circumstances under which a household may change 
its designation of head of household, and how such changes must be 
reported to the State agency. If all adult household members do not 
agree to the selection or decline to select an adult parent as the head 
of household, the State agency may designate the head of household or 
permit the household to make another selection. In no event shall the 
household's failure to select an adult parent of children or an adult 
who has parental control over children as the head of household delay 
the certification or result in the denial of benefits of an otherwise 
eligible household. For households that do not consist of adult parents 
and children or adults who have parental control of children living in 
the household, the State agency shall designate the head of household or 
permit the household to do so.
    (2) For purposes of failure to comply with Sec. 273.7 and 
Sec. 273.22 (to the extent that workfare programs operated under this 
paragraph are included as components of State agency E&T programs), the 
head of household shall be the principal wage earner unless the 
household has selected an adult parent of children as specified in 
Sec. 273.1(d)(1). The principal wage earner shall be the household 
member (including excluded members) who is the greatest source of earned 
income in the two months prior to the month of the violation. This 
provision applies only if the employment involves 20 hours or more per 
week or provides weekly earnings at least equivalent to the Federal 
minimum wage multiplied by 20 hours. No person of any age living with a 
parent or person fulfilling the role of a parent who is registered for 
work or exempt from work registration requirements because such parent 
or person fulfilling the role of a parent is subject to and 
participating in any work requirement under title IV of the Social 
Security Act, or in receipt of unemployment compensation (or has 
registered for work as part of the application for or receipt of 
unemployment compensation), or is employed or self-employed and working 
a minimum of 30 hours weekly or receiving weekly earnings equal to the 
Federal minimum wage multiplied by 30 hours shall be considered the head 
of household unless the person is an adult parent of children as 
specified in Sec. 273.1(d)(1) and the household elects to designate the 
adult parent as its head of household. If there is no principal source 
of earned income in the household, the household member, documented in 
the casefile as the head

[[Page 550]]

of the household at the time of the violation, shall be considered the 
head of household. The designation of head of household through the 
circumstances of this paragraph shall take precedence over a previous 
designation of head of household at least until the period of 
ineligibility is ended.
    (e) Residents of institutions. (1) Individuals shall be considered 
residents of an institution when the institution provides them with the 
majority of their meals (over 50% of three meals daily) as part of the 
institution's normal services. Residents of institutions are not 
eligible for participation in the program with the following exceptions:
    (i) Residents of federally subsidized housing for the elderly built 
under section 202 of the Housing Act of 1959.
    (ii) Narcotic addicts or alcoholics who, for the purpose of regular 
participation in a drug or alcohol treatment and rehabilitation program, 
reside at a facility or treatment center, and their children who live 
with them.
    (iii) Disabled or blind individuals (as defined in paragraphs (2) 
through (11) of the definition of ``Elderly or disabled member,'' 
contained in Sec. 271.2) who are residents of group living arrangements 
(as defined in Sec. 271.2).
    (iv) Women or women with their children temporarily residing in a 
shelter for battered women and children as defined in Sec. 271.2. Such 
persons temporarily residing in shelters for battered women and children 
shall be considered individual household units for the purposes of 
applying for and participating in the Program.
    (v) Residents of public or private nonprofit shelters for homeless 
persons.
    (2) Residents of public institutions who apply for SSI prior to 
their release from an institution under the Social Security 
Administration's Prerelease Program for the Institutionalized (42 U.S.C. 
1383 (j)) shall be permitted to apply for food stamps at the same time 
they apply for SSI. These prerelease applicants shall be processed in 
accordance with the provisions in Sec. 273.2(c), (g), (i), (j), and (k), 
Sec. 273.10(a) and Sec. 273.11(i), as appropriate.
    (f) Authorized representatives. The head of household, spouse, or 
any other responsible member of the household may designate an 
authorized representative to act on behalf of the household in making 
application for the Program, in obtaining benefits, and/or in using 
benefits at authorized retail food firms and meal services. Rules 
pertaining to the use of authorized representatives to obtain household 
benefits or to use household benefits are in Sec. 274.5. Rules 
pertaining to designating authorized representatives to apply for the 
Program are specified in this section.
    (1) Making application for the program. When the head of the 
household or the spouse cannot make application, another household 
member may apply or an adult nonhousehold member may be designated as 
the authorized representative for that purpose. The head of the 
household or the spouse should prepare or review the application 
whenever possible, even though another household member or the 
authorized representative will actually be interviewed. In conjunction 
with these provisions, another household member, or the household's 
authorized representative, may complete work registration forms for 
those household members required to register for work. The State agency 
shall inform the household that the household will be held liable for 
any over issuance which results from erroneous information given by the 
authorized representative, except as provided in Sec. 273.11(e) and 
Sec. 273.16(a). Adults who are non-household members may be designated 
as authorized representatives for certification purposes only under the 
following conditions:
    (i) The authorized representative has been designated in writing by 
the head of the household, or the spouse, or another responsible member 
of the household; and
    (ii) The authorized representative is an adult who is sufficiently 
aware of relevant household circumstances.
    (2) Drug addict/alcoholic treatment centers and group homes as 
authorized representatives. Narcotic addicts or alcoholics who regularly 
participate in a drug or alcoholic treatment program (as defined in 
Sec. 271.2) on a resident basis and their children who live with them 
and disabled or blind residents of group living arrangements (as defined 
in Sec. 271.2) who receive benefits under title II or title XVI of the 
Social Security

[[Page 551]]

Act may elect to participate in the Food Stamp Program.
    (i) The residents of drug or alcoholic treatment centers shall apply 
and be certified for program participation through the use of an 
authorized representative who shall be an employee of and designated by 
the publicly operated community mental health center or the private 
nonprofit organization or institution that is administering the 
treatment and rehabilitation program.
    (ii) Residents of group living arrangements shall either apply and 
be certified through use of an authorized representative employed and 
designated by the group living arrangement or apply and be certified on 
their own behalf or through an authorized representative of their own 
choice. The group living arrangement shall determine if any resident may 
apply for food stamps on his/her own behalf; the determination should be 
based on the resident's physical and mental ability to handle his/her 
own affairs. The group living arrangement is encouraged to consult with 
any other agencies of the State providing other services to individual 
residents prior to a determination. All of the residents of the group 
living arrangement do not have to be certified either through an 
authorized representative or individually in order for one or the other 
method to be used. Applications shall be accepted for any individual 
applying as a one-person household or for any grouping of residents 
applying as a household as defined in Sec. 273.1. If the residents are 
certified on their own behalf, the coupon allotment may either be 
returned to the facility to be used to purchase food for meals served 
either communally or individually to eligible residents; used by 
eligible residents to purchase and prepare food for their own 
consumption; and/or to purchase meals prepared and served by the group 
living arrangement. In any case, the group living arrangement is 
responsible for complying with the requirements set forth in 
Sec. 273.11(f). If the group living arrangement has its status as an 
authorized representative suspended by FCS (as discussed in 
Sec. 273.11(f)(6)), residents applying on their own behalf shall still 
be able to participate if otherwise eligible.
    (3) In the event the only adult living with a household is 
classified as a non-household member as defined in paragraph (b) of this 
section, that individual may be the authorized representative for the 
minor household members.
    (4) The following restrictions apply to authorized representatives: 
(i) State agency employees who are involved in the certification and/or 
issuance processes and retailers that are authorized to accept food 
coupons may not act as authorized representatives without the specific 
written approval of the designated State agency official and only if 
that official determines that no one else is available to serve as an 
authorized representative.
    (ii) Individuals disqualified for an intentional Program violation 
shall not act as authorized representatives during the period of 
disqualification, unless the individual disqualified is the only adult 
member of the household able to act on its behalf and the State agency 
has determined that no one else is available to serve as an authorized 
representative. The State agency shall separately determine whether 
these individuals are needed to apply on behalf of the household, to 
obtain coupons, and to use the coupons for food for the household. For 
example, the household may have an authorized representative to obtain 
its coupons each month, but not be able to find anyone to purchase food 
regularly with the coupons. If the State agency also is unable to find 
anyone to serve as an authorized representative to purchase food 
regularly with the coupons, the disqualified member shall be allowed to 
do so.
    (iii) The State agency shall insure that authorized representatives 
are properly designated. The name of the authorized representative shall 
be contained in the household's case file. Limits shall not be placed on 
the number of households an authorized representative may represent. In 
the event employers, such as those that employ migrant or seasonal farm-
workers, are designated as authorized representatives or that a single 
authorized representative has access to a large number of ATP's or 
coupons, the State

[[Page 552]]

agency should exercise caution to assure that: The household has freely 
requested the assistance of the authorized representative; the 
household's circumstances are correctly represented and the household is 
receiving the correct amount of benefits; and that the authorized 
representative is properly using the coupons. State agencies which have 
obtained evidence that an authorized representative has misrepresented a 
household's circumstances and has knowingly provided false information 
pertaining to the household, or has made improper use of coupons, may 
disqualify that authorized representative from participating as an 
authorized representative in the Food Stamp Program for up to one year. 
The State agency shall send written notification to the affected 
household(s) and the authorized representative thirty days prior to the 
date of disqualification. The notification shall include: The proposed 
action; the reason for the proposed action; the household's right to 
request a fair hearing; the telephone number of the office; and, if 
possible, the name of the person to contact for additional information. 
This provision is not applicable in the case of drug and alcoholic 
treatment centers and those group homes which act as authorized 
representatives for their residents.
    (iv) Homeless meal providers, as defined in Sec. 271.2, may not act 
as authorized representatives for homeless food stamp recipients.
    (g) Strikers. (1) Households with striking members shall be 
ineligible to participate in the Food Stamp Program unless the household 
was eligible for benefits the day prior to the strike and is otherwise 
eligible at the time of application. However, such a household shall not 
receive an increased allotment as the result of a decrease in the income 
of the striking member(s) of the household.
    (2) For food stamp purposes, a striker shall be anyone involved in a 
strike or concerted stoppage of work by emloyees (including a stoppage 
by reason of the expiration of a collective-bargaining agreement) and 
any concerted slowdown or other concerted interruption of operations by 
employees. Any employee affected by a lockout, however, shall not be 
deemed to be a striker. Further, an individual who goes on strike who is 
exempt from work registration, in accordance with Sec. 273.7(b), the day 
prior to the strike, other than those exempt solely on the grounds that 
they are employed, shall not be deemed to be a striker. Examples of non-
strikers who are eligible for participation in the program include but 
are not limited to:
    (i) Employees whose workplace is closed by an employer in order to 
resist demands of employees (e.g., a lockout);
    (ii) Employees unable to work as a result of striking employees 
(e.g., truckdrivers who are not working because striking newspaper 
pressmen prevent newspapers from being printed); and,
    (iii) Employees who are not part of the bargaining unit on strike 
who do not want to cross a picket line due to fear of personal injury or 
death.
    (3) Pre-strike eligibility shall be determined by considering the 
day prior to the strike as the day of application and assuming the 
strike did not occur.
    (4) Eligibility at time of application shall be determined by 
comparing the striking member's income before the strike (as calculated 
for paragraph (g)(3) of this section) to the striker's current income 
and adding the higher of the two to the current income of nonstriking 
members during the month of application. To determine benefits (and 
eligibility for households subject to the net income eligibility 
standard), deduction shall be calculated for the month of application as 
for any other household. Whether the striker's pre-strike earnings are 
used or his current income is used, the earnings deduction shall be 
allowed if appropriate.
    (5) Strikers whose households are eligible to participate under the 
criteria in Sec. 273.1(g) shall be subject to the work registration 
requirements under Sec. 273.7 unless exempt under Sec. 273.7(b) the day 
of application.

[Amdt. 132, 43 FR 47889, Oct. 17, 1978]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 273.1, 
see the List of CFR Sections Affected in the Finding Aids section of 
this volume.

[[Page 553]]


<R05>
Sec. 273.2  Application processing.

    (a) General purpose. The application process includes filing and 
completing an application form, being interviewed, and having certain 
information verified. The State agency shall act promptly on all 
applications and provide food stamp benefits retroactive to the month of 
application to those households that have completed the application 
process and have been determined eligible. Expedited service shall be 
available to households in immediate need. Specific responsibilities of 
households and State agencies in the application process are detailed 
below.
    (b) Food Stamp application form.--(1) Content. Each application form 
shall contain:
    (i) In prominent and boldface lettering and understandable terms a 
statement that the information provided by the applicant in connection 
with the application for food stamp benefits will be subject to 
verification by Federal, State and local officials to determine if such 
information is factual; that if any information is incorrect, food 
stamps may be denied to the applicant; and that the applicant may be 
subject to criminal prosecution for knowingly providing incorrect 
information;
    (ii) In prominent and boldface lettering and understandable terms a 
description of the civil and criminal provisions and penalties for 
violations of the Food Stamp Act;
    (iii) A statement to be signed by one adult household member which 
certifies, under penalty of perjury, the truth of the information 
contained in the application, including the information concerning 
citizenship and alien status;
    (iv) A place on the front page of the application where the 
applicant can write his/her name, address and signature;
    (v) In plain and prominent language on or near the front page of the 
application, notification of the household's right to immediately file 
the application as long as it contains the applicant's name and address 
and the signature of a responsible household member or the household's 
authorized representative;
    (vi) In plain and prominent language on or near the front page of 
the application, a description of the expedited service provisions 
described in paragraph (i) of this section; and
    (vii) In plain and prominent language on or near the front page of 
the application, notification that benefits are provided from the date 
of application.
    (2) Income and eligibility verification system (IEVS). All 
applicants for food stamp benefits shall be notified at the time of 
application and at each recertification through a written statement on 
or provided with the application form that information available through 
the State income and eligibility verification (IEVS) will be requested, 
used and may be verified through collateral contact when discrepancies 
are found by the State agency, and that such information may affect the 
household's eligibility and level of benefits. All applicants shall also 
be notified on the application form that the alien status of any 
household member may be subject to verification by INS through the 
submission of information from the application to INS, and that the 
submitted information received from INS may affect the household's 
eligibility and level of benefits.
    (3) Deviations. All State agencies shall use an application form 
designed by FCS. FCS may approve a deviation (design/contents) from that 
form to accommodate the use of a multi-program application form, the 
requirements of a computer system (including the use of on-line 
applications), or other exigencies for which the State agency can submit 
adequate justification, provided the form is brief, understandable to 
applicants, easy to use, and, for multi-program applications, clear 
enough to afford applicants the option of answering only those questions 
relevant to the program or programs for which they are applying. State 
agencies may request assistance from FCS in the development of a brief, 
simply-written and readable application, including application forms 
which cover the Food Stamp Program and the Aid to Families with 
Dependent Children Program or the Medicaid Program.
    (c) Filing an application--(1) Household's right to file. Households 
must file food stamp applications by submitting the forms to the food 
stamp office either in person, through an authorized

[[Page 554]]

representative or by mail. The length of time a State agency has to 
deliver benefits is calculated from the date the application is filed in 
the food stamp office designated by the State agency to accept the 
household's application, except when a resident of a public institution 
is jointly applying for SSI and food stamps prior to his/her release 
from an institution in accordance with Sec. 273.1(e)(2). Residents of 
public institutions who apply for foods stamps prior to their release 
from the institution shall be certified in accordance with 
Sec. 273.2(g)(1) or Sec. 273.2(i)(3)(i), as appropriate. Each household 
has the right to file an application form on the same day it contacts 
the food stamp office during office hours. The household shall be 
advised that it does not have to be interviewed before filing the 
application and may file an incomplete application form as long as the 
form contains the applicant's name and address, and is signed by a 
responsible member of the household or the household's authorized 
representative. State agencies shall document the date the application 
was filed by recording on the application the date it was received by 
the food stamp office. When a resident of an institution is jointly 
applying for SSI and food stamps prior to leaving the institution, the 
filing date of the application to be recorded by the State agency on the 
food stamp application is the date of release of the applicant from the 
institution.
    (2) Contacting the food stamp office. (i) State agencies shall 
encourage households to file an application form the same day the 
household or its representative contacts the food stamp office in person 
or by telephone and expresses interest in obtaining food stamp 
assistance. If a household contacting the food stamp office by telephone 
does not wish to come to the appropriate office to file the application 
that same day and instead prefers receiving an application through the 
mail, the State agency shall mail an application form to the household 
on the same day the telephone request is received. An application shall 
also be mailed on the same day a written request for food assistance is 
received.
    (ii) Where a project area has designated certification offices to 
serve specific geographic areas, households may contact an office other 
than the one designated to service the area in which they reside. When a 
household contacts the wrong certification office within a project area 
in person or by telephone, the certification office shall, in addition 
to meeting the requirements in paragraph (c)(2)(i) of this section, give 
the household the address and telephone number of the appropriate 
office. The certification office shall also offer to forward the 
household's application to the appropriate office that same day if the 
household has completed enough information on the application to file. 
The household shall be informed that its application will not be 
considered filed and the processing standards shall not begin until the 
application is received by the appropriate office. If the household has 
mailed its application to the wrong office within a project area, the 
certification office shall mail the application to the appropriate 
office on the same day.
    (iii) In State agencies that elect to have Statewide residency, as 
provided in Sec. 273.3, the application processing timeframes begin when 
the application is filed in any food stamp office in the State.
    (3) Availability of the application form. The State agency shall 
make application forms readily accessible to potentially eligible 
households. The State agency shall also provide an application form to 
anyone who requests the form.
    (4) Notice of right to file. The State agency shall post signs in 
the certification office which explain the application processing 
standards and the right to file an application on the day of initial 
contact. The State agency shall include similar information about same 
day filing on the application form.
    (5) Notice of Required Verification. The State agency shall provide 
each household at the time of application for certification and 
recertification with a notice that informs the household of the 
verification requirements the household must meet as part of the 
application process. The notice shall also inform the household of the 
State agency's responsibility to assist the

[[Page 555]]

household in obtaining required verification provided the household is 
cooperating with the State agency as specified in (d)(1) of this 
section. The notice shall be written in clear and simple language and 
shall meet the bilingual requirements designated in Sec. 272.4(b) of 
this chapter. At a minimum, the notice shall contain examples of the 
types of documents the household should provide and explain the period 
of time the documents should cover.
    (6) Withdrawing application. The household may voluntarily withdraw 
its application at any time prior to the determination of eligibility. 
The State agency shall document in the case file the reason for 
withdrawal, if any was stated by the household, and that contact was 
made with the household to confirm the withdrawal. The household shall 
be advised of its right to reapply at any time subsequent to a 
withdrawal.
    (d) Household cooperation. (1) To determine eligibility, the 
application form must be completed and signed, the household or its 
authorized representative must be interviewed, and certain information 
on the application must be verified. If the household refuses to 
cooperate with the State agency in completing this process, the 
application shall be denied at the time of refusal. For a determination 
of refusal to be made, the household must be able to cooperate, but 
clearly demonstrate that it will not take actions that it can take and 
that are required to complete the application process. For example, to 
be denied for refusal to cooperate, a household must refuse to be 
interviewed not merely failing to appear for the interview. If there is 
any question as to whether the household has merely failed to cooperate, 
as opposed to refused to cooperate, the household shall not be denied. 
The household shall also be determined ineligible if it refuses to 
cooperate in any subsequent review of its eligibility, including reviews 
generated by reported changes and applications for recertification. Once 
denied or terminated for refusal to cooperate, the household may reapply 
but shall not be determined eligible until it cooperates with the State 
agency. The State agency shall not determine the household to be 
ineligible when a person outside of the household fails to cooperate 
with a request for verification. The State agency shall not consider 
individuals identified as nonhousehold members under Sec. 273.1(b)(2) as 
individuals outside the household.
    (2) Cooperation with QC Reviewer. In addition, the household shall 
be determined ineligible if it refuses to cooperate in any subsequent 
review of its eligibility as a part of a quality control review. If a 
household is terminated for refusal to cooperate with a quality control 
reviewer, in accordance with Sec. 275.3(c)(5) or Sec. 275.12(g)(1)(ii), 
the household may reapply, but shall not be determined eligible until it 
cooperates with the quality control reviewer. If a household terminated 
for refusal to cooperate with a State quality control reviewer reapplies 
after 95 days from the end of the annual review period, the household 
shall not be determined ineligible for its refusal to cooperate with a 
State quality control reviewer during the completed review period, but 
must provide verification in accordance with Sec. 273.2(f)(1)(ix). If a 
household terminated for refusal to cooperate with a Federal quality 
control reviewer reapplies after seven months from the end of the annual 
review period, the household shall not be determined ineligible for its 
refusal to cooperate with a Federal quality control reviewer during the 
completed review period, but must provide verification in accordance 
with Sec. 273.2(f)(1)(ix).
    (e) Interviews. (1) All applicant households, including those 
submitting applications by mail, shall have face-to-face interviews in a 
food stamp office or other certification site with a qualified 
eligibility worker prior to initial certification and all 
recertifications. The individual interviewed may be the head of 
household, spouse, any other responsible member of the household, or an 
authorized representative. The applicant may bring any person he or she 
chooses to the interview. The interviewer shall not simply review the 
information that appears on the application, but shall explore and 
resolve with the household unclear and incomplete information. 
Households shall be advised of their rights and responsibilities during 
the interview, including

[[Page 556]]

the appropriate application processing standard and the households' 
responsibility to report changes. The interview shall be conducted as an 
official and confidential discussion of household circumstances. The 
applicant's right to privacy shall be protected during the interview. 
Facilities shall be adequate to preserve the privacy and confidentiality 
of the interview.
    (2) The office interview shall be waived if requested by any 
household which is unable to appoint an authorized representative and 
which has no household members able to come to the food stamp office 
because they are elderly or disabled (as defined in Sec. 271.2). The 
office interview shall also be waived if requested by any household 
which is unable to appoint an authorized representative and lives in a 
location which is not served by a certification office. The State agency 
shall waive the office interview on a case-by-case basis for any 
household which is unable to appoint an authorized representative and 
which has no household members able to come to the food stamp office 
because of transportation difficulties or similar hardships which the 
State agency determines warrants a waiver of the office interview. These 
hardship conditions include, but are not limited to: Illness, care of a 
household member, hardships due to residency in a rural area, prolonged 
severe weather, or work or training hours which prevent the household 
from participating in an in-office interview. The State agency shall 
determine if the transportation difficulty or hardship reported by a 
household warrants a waiver of the office interview and shall document 
in the case file why a request for a waiver was granted or denied.
    (i) The State agency has the option of conducting a telephone 
interview or a home visit for those households for whom the office 
interview is waived. Home visits shall be used only if the time of the 
visit is scheduled in advance with the household.
    (ii) Waiver of the face-to-face interview does not exempt the 
household from the verification requirements, although special 
procedures may be used to permit the household to provide verification 
and thus obtain its benefits in a timely manner, such as substituting a 
collateral contact in cases where documentary verification would 
normally be provided.
    (iii) Waiver of the face-to-face interview shall not affect the 
length of the household's certification period.
    (3) The State agency shall schedule all interviews as promptly as 
possible to insure eligible households receive an opportunity to 
participate within 30 days after the application is filed. If a 
household fails to appear for the first interview, the State agency 
shall attempt to schedule another interview. The interview shall be 
rescheduled by the State agency without requiring the household to 
provide good cause for failing to appear. However, if the household does 
not appear for the rescheduled interview, the State agency need not 
initiate action to schedule any further interviews unless the household 
requests that another interview be scheduled.
    (f) Verification. Verification is the use of third-party information 
or documentation to establish the accuracy of statements on the 
application.
    (1) Mandatory verification. State agencies shall verify the 
following information prior to certification for households initially 
applying:
    (i) Gross nonexempt income. Gross nonexempt income shall be verified 
for all households prior to certification. However, where all attempts 
to verify the income have been unsuccessful because the person or 
organization providing the income has failed to cooperate with the 
household and the State agency, and all other sources of verification 
are unavailable, the eligibility worker shall determine an amount to be 
used for certification purposes based on the best available information.
    (ii) Alien status.  (A) Based on the application, the State agency 
shall determine if members identified as aliens are eligible aliens, as 
defined in Sec. 273.4 (a)(2) through (a)(9), by requiring that the 
household present verification for each alien member.
    (B) Aliens in the categories specified in Sec. 273.4(a) (2) and (3) 
shall present either an Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) 
Form I-151 or i-551, or such other documents which identify the aliens' 
immigration status and

[[Page 557]]

which the State agency determines are reasonable of the aliens' 
immigration status.
    (C) Aliens in the categories specified in Sec. 273.4 (a)(4) through 
(a)(7) shall present an INS Form I-94: Arrival-Departure Record or other 
documents which identify the aliens' immigration status and which the 
State agency determines are reasonable evidence of the aliens' 
immigration status. The State agency shall accept the INS Form I-94 as 
verification of eligible alien status only if the form is annotated with 
section 207, 208, 212(d)(5) or 243(h) of the Immigration and Nationality 
Act or if the form is annotated with any one of the following terms or a 
combination of the following terms: Refugee, parolee, paroled, or 
asylum. An INS Form I-94 annotated with any one of the letters (A) 
through (L) shall be considered verification of ineligible alien status 
unless the alien can provide other documentation from INS which 
indicates that the alien is eligible. If the INS Form I-94 does not bear 
any of the above annotations and the alien has no other verification of 
alien classification in his or her possession, the State agency shall 
advise the alien to submit Form G-641, Application for Verification of 
Information from Immigration and Naturalization Service Records, to INS. 
State agencies shall accept this form when presented by the alien and 
properly annotated at the bottom by an INS representative as evidence of 
lawful admission for permanent residence or parole for humanitarian 
reasons. The alien shall also be advised that classification under 
section 207, 208, 212(d)(5), or 243(h) of the Immigration and 
Nationality Act shall result in eligible status; that the alien may be 
eligible if acceptable verification is obtained; and that the alien may 
contact INS, as stated previously, or otherwise obtain the necessary 
verification or, if the alien wishes and signs a written consent, that 
the State agency will contact INS to obtain clarification of the alien's 
status. If the alien does not wish to contact INS, the household shall 
be given the option of withdrawing its application or participating 
without that member.
    (D) Aliens in the categories specified in Sec. 273.4(a)(8) and 
(a)(9) shall present documentation such as, but not limited to, a 
letter, notice of eligibility, or identification card which clearly 
identifies the alien has been granted legal status in one of those 
categories.
    (E) The State agency is responsible to offer to contact INS when the 
alien has an INS document that does not clearly indicate eligible or 
ineligible alien status. The State agency does not need to offer to 
contact INS on the alien's behalf when the alien does not provide an INS 
document. However, when State agencies accept non-INS documentation 
determined to be reasonable evidence of the alien's immigration status 
as specified in paragraphs (f)(1)(ii) (B), (C), and (D) of this section, 
the State agency shall photocopy the document and transmit the photocopy 
to INS for verification. Pending such verification, the State agency 
shall not delay, deny, reduce or terminate the individual's eligibility 
for benefits on the basis of the individual's immigration status. The 
State agency does not need to receive the alien applicant's written 
consent in order to transmit the photocopy to INS.
    (F) The State agency shall provide alien applicants with a 
reasonable opportunity to submit acceptable documentation of their 
eligible alien status as of the 30th day following the date of 
application. A reasonable opportunity shall be at least 10 days from the 
date of the State agency's request for an acceptable document. When the 
State agency accepts non-INS documentation as specified in paragraphs 
(f)(1)(ii) (B), (C), and (D) of this section and fails to provide an 
alien applicant with a reasonable opportunity as of the 30th day 
following the date of application, the State agency shall provide the 
household with benefits no later than 30 days following the date of 
application Provided the household is otherwise eligible.
    (G) Except as specified in paragraphs (f)(1)(ii)(F) and (f)(10)(i) 
of this section, the alien applicant whose status is questionable shall 
be ineligible until the alien provides acceptable documentation. The 
income and resources of the ineligible alien shall be treated in the 
same manner as a disqualified individual set forth in Sec. 273.11(c), 
and

[[Page 558]]

shall be considered available in determining the eligibility of any 
remaining members.
    (iii) Utility expenses.  The State agency shall verify a household's 
utility expenses if the household wishes to claim expenses in excess of 
the State agency's utility standard and the expense would actually 
result in a deduction. If the household's actual utility expenses cannot 
be verified before the 30 days allowed to process the application 
expire, the State agency shall use the standard utility allowance, 
provided the household is entitled to use the standard as specified in 
Sec. 273.9(d). If the household wishes to claim expenses for an 
unoccupied home, the State agency shall verify the household's actual 
utility expenses for the unoccupied home in every case and shall not use 
the standard utility allowance.
    (iv) Medical expenses. The amount of any medical expenses (including 
the amount of reimbursements) deductible under Sec. 273.9(d)(3) shall be 
verified prior to initial certification. Verification of other factors, 
such as the allowability of services provided or the eligibility of the 
person incurring the cost, shall be required if questionable.
    (v) Social security numbers. The State agency shall verify the 
social security number(s) (SSN) reported by the household by submitting 
them to the Social Security Administration (SSA) for verification 
according to procedures established by SSA. The State agency shall not 
delay the certification for or issuance of benefits to an otherwise 
eligible household solely to verify the SSN of a household member. Once 
an SSN has been verified, the State agency shall make a permanent 
annotation to its file to prevent the unnecessary reverification of the 
SSN in the future. The State agency shall accept as verified an SSN 
which has been verified by another program participating in the IEVS 
described in Sec. 272.8. If an individual is unable to provide an SSN or 
does not have an SSN, the State agency shall require the individual to 
submit Form SS-5, Application for a Social Security Number, to the SSA 
in accordance with procedures in Sec. 273.6. A completed SSA Form 2853 
shall be considered proof of application for an SSN for a newborn 
infant.
    (vi) Residency. The residency requirements of Sec. 273.3 shall be 
verified except in unusual cases (such as homeless households, some 
migrant farmworker households, or households newly arrived in a project 
area) where verification of residency cannot reasonably be accomplished. 
Verification of residency should be accomplished to the extent possible 
in conjunction with the verification of other information such as, but 
not limited to, rent and mortgage payments, utility expenses, and 
identity. If verification cannot be accomplished in conjunction with the 
verification of other information, then the State agency shall use a 
collateral contact or other readily available documentary evidence. 
Documents used to verify other factors of eligibility should normally 
suffice to verify residency as well. Any documents or collateral contact 
which reasonably establish the applicant's residency must be accepted 
and no requirement for a specific type of verification may be imposed. 
No durational residency requirement shall be established.
    (vii) Identity. The identity of the person making application shall 
be verified. Where an authorized representative applies on behalf of a 
household, the identity of both the authorized representative and the 
head of household shall be verified. Identity may be verified through 
readily available documentary evidence, or if this is unavailable, 
through a collateral contact. Examples of acceptable documentary 
evidence which the applicant may provide include, but are not limited 
to, a driver's license, a work or school ID, an ID for health benefits 
or for another assistance or social services program, a voter 
registration card, wage stubs, or a birth certificate. Any documents 
which reasonably establish the applicant's identity must be accepted, 
and no requirement for a specific type of document, such as a birth 
certificate, may be imposed.
    (viii) Disability. (A) The State agency shall verify disability as 
defined in Sec. 271.2 as follows:
    (1) For individuals to be considered disabled under paragraphs (2), 
(3) and (4) of the definition, the household

[[Page 559]]

shall provide proof that the disabled individual is receiving benefits 
under titles I, II, X, XIV or XVI of the Social Security Act.
    (2) For individuals to be considered disabled under paragraph (6) of 
the definition, the household must present a statement from the Veterans 
Administration (VA) which clearly indicates that the disabled individual 
is receiving VA disability benefits for a service-connected or non-
service-connected disability and that the disability is rated as total 
or paid at the total rate by VA.
    (3) For individuals to be considered disabled under paragraphs (7) 
and (8) of the definition, proof by the household that the disabled 
individual is receiving VA disability benefits is sufficient 
verification of disability.
    (4) For individuals to be considered disabled under paragraphs (5) 
and (9) of the definition, the State agency shall use the Social 
Security Administration's (SSA) most current list of disabilities 
considered permanent under the Social Security Act for verifying 
disability. If it is obvious to the caseworker that the individual has 
one of the listed disabilities, the household shall be considered to 
have verified disability. If disability is not obvious to the 
caseworker, the household shall provide a statement from a physician or 
licensed or certified psychologist certifying that the individual has 
one of the nonobvious disabilities listed as the means for verifying 
disability under paragraphs (5) and (9) of the definition.
    (5) For individuals to be considered disabled under paragraph (10) 
of the definition, the household shall provide proof that the individual 
receives a Railroad Retirement disability annuity from the Railroad 
Retirement Board and has been determined to qualify for Medicare.
    (6) For individuals to be considered disabled under paragraph (11) 
of the definition, the household shall provide proof that the individual 
receives interim assistance benefits pending the receipt of Supplemental 
Security Income; or disability-related medical assistance under title 
XIX of the SSA; or disability-based State general assistance benefits. 
The State agency shall verify that the eligibility to receive these 
benefits is based upon disability or blindness criteria which are at 
least as stringent as those used under title XVI of the Social Security 
Act.
    (B) For disability determinations which must be made relevant to the 
provisions of Sec. 273.1(a)(2)(ii), the State agency shall use the SSA's 
most current list of disabilities as the initial step for verifying if 
an individual has a disability considered permanent under the Social 
Security Act. However, only those individuals who suffer from one of the 
disabilities mentioned in the SSA list who are unable to purchase and 
prepare meals because of such disability shall be considered disabled 
for the purpose of this provision. If it is obvious to the caseworker 
that the individual is unable to purchase and prepare meals because he/
she suffers from a severe physical or mental disability, the individual 
shall be considered disabled for the purpose of the provision even if 
the disability is not specifically mentioned on the SSA list. If the 
disability is not obvious to the caseworker, he/she shall verify the 
disability by requiring a statement from a physician or licensed or 
certified psychologist certifying that the individual (in the 
physician's/psychologist's opinion) is unable to purchase and prepare 
meals because he/she suffers from one of the nonobvious disabilities 
mentioned in the SSA list or is unable to purchase meals because he/she 
suffers from some other severe, permanent physical or mental disease or 
nondisease-related disability. The elderly and disabled individual (or 
his/her authorized representative) shall be responsible for obtaining 
the cooperation of the individuals with whom he/she resides in providing 
the necessary income information about the others to the State agency 
for purposes of this provision.
    (ix) State agencies shall verify all factors of eligibility for 
households who have been terminated for refusal to cooperate with a 
State quality control reviewer, and reapply after 95 days from the end 
of the annual review period. State agencies shall verify all factors of 
eligibility for households who have been terminated for refusal to 
cooperate with a Federal quality control

[[Page 560]]

reviewer and reapply after seven months from the end of the annual 
review period.
    (x) Household composition.  State agencies shall verify factors 
affecting the composition of a household, if questionable. Individuals 
who claim to be a separate household from those with whom they reside 
shall be responsible for proving that they are a separate household to 
the satisfaction of the State agency. Individuals who claim to be a 
separate household from those with whom they reside based on the various 
age and disability factors for determining separateness shall be 
responsible for proving a claim of separateness (at the State agency's 
request) in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 273.2(f)(1)(viii).
    (xi) Shelter costs for homeless households. Homeless households 
claiming shelter expenses greater than the standard estimate of shelter 
expenses (as defined in Sec. 273.9(d)(5)(i)) must provide verification 
of these shelter expenses. If a homeless household has difficulty in 
obtaining traditional types of verification of shelter costs, the 
caseworker shall use prudent judgment in determining if the verification 
obtained is adequate. For example, if a homeless individual claims to 
have incurred shelter costs for several nights and the costs are 
comparable to costs typically incurred by homeless people for shelter, 
the caseworker may decide to accept this information as adequate 
information and not require further verification.
    (xii) Students. If a person claims to be physically or mentally 
unfit for purposes of the student exemption contained in 
Sec. 273.5(b)(2) and the unfitness is not evident to the State agency, 
verification may be required. Appropriate verification may consist of 
receipt of temporary or permanent disability benefits issued by 
governmental or private sources, or of a statement from a physician or 
licensed or certified psychologist.
    (xiii) Legal obligation and actual child support payments. The State 
agency shall obtain verification of the household's legal obligation to 
pay child support, the amount of the obligation, and the monthly amount 
of child support the household actually pays. Documents that are 
accepted as verification of the household's legal obligation to pay 
child support shall not be accepted as verification of the household's 
actual monthly child support payments. State agencies may and are 
strongly encouraged to obtain information regarding a household member's 
child support obligation and payments from Child Support Enforcement 
(CSE) automated data files. The State agency shall give the household an 
opportunity to resolve any discrepancy between household verification 
and CSE records in accordance with paragraph (f)(9) of this section.
    (2) Verification of questionable information. (i) The State agency 
shall verify, prior to certification of the household, all other factors 
of eligibility which the State agency determines are questionable and 
affect the household's eligibility and benefit level. The State agency 
shall establish guidelines to be followed in determining what shall be 
considered questionable information. These guidelines shall not 
prescribe verification based on race, religion, ethnic background, or 
national origin. These guidelines shall not target groups such as 
migrant farmworkers or American Indians for more intensive verification 
under this provision.
    (ii) Citizenship. (A) When a household's statement that one or more 
of its members are U.S. citizens is questionable, the household shall be 
asked to provide acceptable verification. Acceptable forms of 
verification include birth certificates, religious records, voter 
registration cards, certificates of citizenship or naturalization 
provided by INS, such as identification cards for use of resident 
citizens in the United States (INS Form I-179 or INS Form I-197) or U.S. 
passports. Participation in the AFDC program shall also be considered 
acceptable verification if verification of citizenship was obtained for 
that program. If the above forms of verification cannot be obtained and 
the household can provide a reasonable explanation as to why 
verification is not available, the State agency shall accept a signed 
statement from someone who is a U.S. citizen which declares, under 
penalty of perjury, that the member in question is a U.S. citizen. The 
signed statement shall contain a

[[Page 561]]

warning of the penalties for helping someone commit fraud, such as: If 
you intentionally give false information to help this person get food 
stamps, you may be fined, imprisoned, or both.
    (B) The member whose citizenship is in question shall be ineligible 
to participate until proof of U.S. citizenship is obtained. Until proof 
of U.S. citizenship is obtained, the member whose citizenship is in 
question will have his or her income, less a prorata share, and all of 
his or her resources considered available to any remaining household 
members as set forth in Sec. 273.11(c).
    (3) State agency options. In addition to the verification required 
in paragraphs (f)(1) and (f)(2) of this section, the State agency may 
elect to mandate verification of any other factor which affects 
household eligibility or allotment level, including household size where 
not questionable. Such verification may be required Statewide or 
throughout a project area, but shall not be imposed on a selective, 
case-by-case basis on particular households.
    (i) The State agency may establish its own standards for the use of 
verification, provided that, at a minimum, all questionable factors are 
verified in accordance with paragraph (f)(2) of this section and that 
such standards do not allow for inadvertent discrimination. For example, 
no standard may be applied which prescribes variances in verification 
based on race, religion, ethnic background or national origin, nor may a 
State standard target groups such as migrant farmworkers or American 
Indians for more intensive verification than other households. The 
options specified in this paragraph, shall not apply in those offices of 
the Social Security Administration (SSA) which, in accordance with 
paragraph (k) of this section, provide for the food stamp certification 
of households containing recipients of Supplemental Security Income 
(SSI) and social security benefits. The State agency, however, may 
negotiate with those SSA offices with regard to mandating verification 
of these options.
    (ii) If a State agency opts to verify a deductible expense and 
obtaining the verification may delay the household's certification, the 
State agency shall advise the household that its eligibility and benefit 
level may be determined without providing a deduction for the claimed 
but unverified expense. This provision also applies to the allowance of 
medical expenses as specified in paragraph (f)(1)(iv) of this section. 
Shelter costs would be computed without including the unverified 
components. The standard utility allowance shall be used if the 
household is entitled to claim it and has not verified higher actual 
costs. If the expense cannot be verified within 30 days of the date of 
application, the State agency shall determine the household's 
eligibility and benefit level without providing a deduction of the 
unverified expense. If the household subsequently provides the missing 
verification, the State agency shall redetermine the household's 
benefits, and provide increased benefits, if any, in accordance with the 
timeliness standards in Sec. 273.12 on reported changes. If the expense 
could not be verified within the 30-day processing standard because the 
State agency failed to allow the household sufficient time, as defined 
in paragraph (h)(1) of this section, to verify the expense, the 
household shall be entitled to the restoration of benefits retroactive 
to the month of application, provided that the missing verification is 
supplied in accordance with paragraph (h)(3) of this section. If the 
household would be ineligible unless the expense is allowed, the 
household's application shall be handled as provided in paragraph (h) of 
this section.
    (4) Sources of verification--(i) Documentary evidence. State 
agencies shall use documentary evidence as the primary source of 
verification for all items except residency and household size. These 
items may be verified either through readily available documentary 
evidence or through a collateral contact, without a requirement being 
imposed that documentary evidence must be the primary source of 
verification. Documentary evidence consists of a written confirmation of 
a household's circumstances. Examples of documentary evidence include 
wage stubs, rent receipts, and utility bills. Although documentary 
evidence shall be the primary source of verification, acceptable 
verification shall not be limited to any single type of document

[[Page 562]]

and may be obtained through the household or other source. Whenever 
documentary evidence cannot be obtained or is insufficient to make a 
firm determination of eligibility or benefit level, the eligibility 
worker may require collateral contacts or home visits. For example, 
documentary evidence may be considered insufficient when the household 
presents pay stubs which do not represent an accurate picture of the 
household's income (such as out-dated pay stubs) or identification 
papers that appear to be falsified.
    (ii) Collateral contacts. A collateral contact is an oral 
confirmation of a household's circumstances by a person outside of the 
household. The collateral contact may be made either in person or over 
the telephone. The State agency may select a collateral contact if the 
household fails to designate one or designates one which is unacceptable 
to the State agency. Examples of acceptable collateral contacts may 
include employers, landlords, social service agencies, migrant service 
agencies, and neighbors of the household who can be expected to provide 
accurate third-party verification.
    (iii) Home visits. Home visits may be used as verification only when 
documentary evidence is insufficient to make a firm determination of 
eligibility or benefit level, or cannot be obtained, and the home visit 
is scheduled in advance with the household.
    (iv) Discrepancies. Where unverified information from a source other 
than the household contradicts statements made by the household, the 
household shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity to resolve the 
discrepancy prior to a determination of eligibility or benefits. The 
State agency may, if it chooses, verify the information directly and 
contact the household only if such direct verification efforts are 
unsuccessful. If the unverified information is received through the 
IEVS, as specified in Sec. 272.8, the State agency may obtain 
verification from a third party as specified in paragraph (f)(9)(v) of 
this section.
    (5) Responsibility of obtaining verification. (i) The household has 
primary responsibility for providing documentary evidence to support 
statements on the application and to resolve any questionable 
information. The State agency shall assist the household in obtaining 
this verification provided the household is cooperating with the State 
agency as specified under paragraph (d)(1) of this section. Households 
may supply documentary evidence in person, through the mail, or through 
an authorized representative. The State agency shall not require the 
household to present verification in person at the food stamp office. 
The State agency shall accept any reasonable documentary evidence 
provided by the household and shall be primarily concerned with how 
adequately the verification proves the statements on the application.
    (ii) Whenever documentary evidence is insufficient to make a firm 
determination of eligibility or benefit level, or cannot be obtained, 
the State agency may require a collateral contact or a home visit. The 
State agency, generally, shall rely on the household to provide the name 
of any collateral contact. The household may request assistance in 
designating a collateral contact. The State agency is not required to 
use a collateral contact designated by the household if the collateral 
contact cannot be expected to provide an accurate third-party 
verification. When the collateral contact designated by the household is 
unacceptable, the State agency shall either designate another collateral 
contact, ask the household to designate another collateral contact or to 
provide an alternative form of verification, or substitute a home visit. 
The State agency is responsible for obtaining verification from 
acceptable collateral contacts.
    (6) Documentation. Case files must be documented to support 
eligibility, ineligibility, and benefit level determinations. 
Documentation shall be in sufficient detail to permit a reviewer to 
determine the reasonableness and accuracy of the determination.
    (7) State Data Exchange and Beneficiary Data Exchange. The State 
agency may verify SSI benefits through the State Data Exchange (SDX), 
and Social Security benefit information through the Beneficiary Data 
Exchange (BENDEX), or through verification provided by the household. 
The State agency may use SDX and BENDEX

[[Page 563]]

data to verify other food stamp eligibility criteria. The State agency 
may access SDX and BENDEX data without release statements from 
households, provided the State agency makes the appropriate data request 
to SSA and executes the necessary data exchange agreements with SSA. The 
household shall be given an opportunity to verify the information from 
another source if the SDX or BENDEX information is contradictory to the 
information provided by the household or is unavailable. Determination 
of the household's eligibility and benefit level shall not be delayed 
past the application processing time standards of paragraph (g) of this 
section if SDX or BENDEX data is unavailable.
    (8) Verification subsequent to initial certification. (i) 
Recertification--(A) At recertification the State agency shall verify a 
change in income or actual utility expenses if the source has changed or 
the amount has changed by more than $25. Previously unreported medical 
expenses and total recurring medical expenses which have changed by more 
than $25 shall also be verified at recertification. The State agency 
shall not verify income if the source has not changed and if the amount 
is unchanged or has changed by $25 or less, unless the information is 
incomplete, inaccurate, inconsistent or outdated. The State agency shall 
also not verify total medical expenses, or actual utility expenses 
claimed by households which are unchanged or have changed by $25 or 
less, unless the information is incomplete, inaccurate, inconsistent or 
outdated. The State agency shall require a household eligible for the 
child support deduction to verify any changes in the legal obligation to 
pay child support, the obligated amount, and the amount of legally 
obligated child support a household member pays to a nonhousehold 
member. The State agency shall verify reportedly unchanged child support 
information only if the information is incomplete, inaccurate, 
inconsistent or outdated.
    (B) Newly obtained social security numbers shall be verified at 
recertification in accordance with verification procedures outlined in 
Sec. 273.2(f)(1)(v).
    (C) Other information which has changed may be verified at 
recertification. Unchanged information shall not be verified unless the 
information is incomplete, inaccurate, inconsistent or outdated. 
Verification under this paragraph shall be subject to the same 
verification procedures as apply during initial verification.
    (ii) Changes. Changes reported during the certification period shall 
be subject to the same verification procedures as apply at initial 
certification, except that the State agency shall not verify changes in 
income if the source has not changed and if the amount has changed by 
$25 or less, unless the information is incomplete, inaccurate, 
inconsistent or outdated. The State agency shall also not verify total 
medical expenses or actual utility expenses which are unchanged or have 
changed by $25 or less, unless the information is incomplete, 
inaccurate, inconsistent or outdated.
    (9) Use of IEVS. (i) The State agency shall use information obtained 
through the IEVS to verify the eligibility and benefit level of 
applicant and participating households, in accordance with procedures 
specified in Sec. 272.8.
    (ii) The State agency may access data through the IEVS provided the 
disclosure safeguards and data exchange agreements required by part 272 
are satisfied.
    (iii) The State agency shall take action, including proper notices 
to households, to terminate, deny, or reduce benefits based on 
information obtain through the IEVS which is considered verified upon 
receipt. This information is social security and SSI benefit information 
obtained from SSA, and AFDC benefit information and UIB information 
obtained from the agencies administering those programs. If the State 
agency has information that the IEVS-obtained information about a 
particular household is questionable, this information shall be 
considered unverified upon receipt and the State agency shall take 
action as specified in paragraph (f)(9)(iv) of this section.
    (iv) Except as noted in this paragraph, prior to taking action to 
terminate, deny, or reduce benefits based on information obtained 
through the IEVS which is considered unverified upon receipt, State 
agencies shall independently verify the information. Such

[[Page 564]]

unverified information is unearned income information from IRS, wage 
information from SSA and SWICAs, and questionable IEVS information 
discussed in paragraph (f)(9)(iii) of this section. Independent 
verification shall include verification of the amount of the asset or 
income involved, whether the household actually has or had access to 
such asset or income such that it would be countable income or resources 
for food stamp purposes, and the period during which such access 
occurred. Except with respect to unearned income information from IRS, 
if a State agency has information which indicates that independent 
verification is not needed, such verification is not required.
    (v) The State agency shall obtain independent verification of 
unverified information obtained from IEVS by means of contacting the 
household and/or the appropriate income, resource or benefit source. If 
the State agency chooses to contact the household, it must do so in 
writing, informing the household of the information which it has 
received, and requesting that the household respond within 10 days. If 
the household fails to respond in a timely manner, the State agency 
shall send it a notice of adverse action as specified in Sec. 273.13. 
The State agency may contact the appropriate source by the means best 
suited to the situation. When the household or appropriate source 
provides the independent verification, the State agency shall properly 
notify the household of the action it intends to take and provide the 
household with an opportunity to request a fair hearing prior to any 
adverse action.
    (10) Use of SAVE. When participating in the INS SAVE Program to 
verify the validity of documents presented by applicant aliens, State 
agency's shall use the following procedures:
    (i) The State agency shall provide an applicant alien with a 
reasonable opportunity to submit acceptable documentation of their 
eligible alien status prior to the 30th day following the date of 
application. A reasonable opportunity shall be at least 10 days from the 
date of the State agency's request for an acceptable document. An alien 
who has been given a reasonable opportunity to submit acceptable 
documentation and has not done so as of the 30th day following the date 
of application shall not be certified for benefits until acceptable 
documentation has been submitted. However, if the 10-day reasonable 
opportunity period provided by the State agency does not lapse before 
the 30th day following the date of application, the State agency shall 
provide the household with benefits no later than 30 days following the 
date of application Provided the household is otherwise eligible.
    (ii) The written consent of the alien applicant shall not be 
required as a condition for the State agency to contact INS to verify 
the validity of documentation.
    (iii) State agencies which access the ASVI database through an 
automated access shall also submit INS Form G-845, with an attached 
photocopy of the alien's document, to INS whenever the initial automated 
access does not confirm the validity of the alien's documentation or a 
significant discrepancy exists between the data provided by the ASVI and 
the information provided by the applicant. Pending such responses from 
either the ASVI or INS Form G-845, the State agency shall not delay, 
deny, reduce, or terminate the alien's eligibility for benefits on the 
basis of the individual's alien status.
    (iv) If the State agency determines, after complying with the 
requirements of this section, that the alien is not in an eligible alien 
status, the State agency shall take action, including proper notices to 
the household, to terminate, deny or reduce benefits. The State agency 
shall provide households the opportunity to request a fair hearing under 
Sec. 273.15 prior to any adverse action.
    (v) The use of SAVE shall be documented in the casefile or other 
agency records. When the State agency is waiting for a response from 
SAVE, agency records shall contain either a notation showing the date of 
the State agency's transmission or a copy of the INS Form G-845 sent to 
INS. Once the SAVE response is received, agency records shall show 
documentation of the ASVI Query Verification Number or contain a copy of 
the INS-annotated Form G-845. Whenever the response

[[Page 565]]

from automated access to the ASVI directs the eligibility worker to 
initiate secondary verification, agency records shall show documentation 
of the ASVI Query Verification Number and contain a copy of the INS Form 
G-845.
    (g) Normal processing standard--(1) Thirty-day processing. The State 
agency shall provide eligible households that complete the initial 
application process an opportunity to participate (as defined in 
Sec. 274.2(b)) as soon as possible, but no later than 30 calendar days 
following the date the application was filed, except for residents of 
public institutions who apply jointly for SSI and food stamp benefits 
prior to release from the institution in accordance with 
Sec. 273.1(e)(2). An application is filed the day the appropriate food 
stamp office receives an application containing the applicant's name and 
address, which is signed by either a responsible member of the household 
or the household's authorized representative. Households entitled to 
expedited processing are specified in paragraph (i) of this section. For 
residents of public institutions who apply for food stamps prior to 
their release from the institution in accordance with Sec. 273.1(e)(2), 
the State agency shall provide an opportunity to participate as soon as 
possible, but not later than 30 calendar days from the date of release 
of the applicant from the institution.
    (2) Combined allotments. Households which apply for initial month 
benefits (as described in Sec. 273.10(a)) after the 15th of the month, 
are processed under normal processing timeframes, have completed the 
application process within 30 days of the date of application, and have 
been determined eligible to receive benefits for the initial month of 
application and the next subsequent month, may be issued a combined 
allotment at State agency option which includes prorated benefits for 
the month of application and benefits for the first full month of 
participation. The benefits shall be issued in accordance with 
Sec. 274.2(c) of this chapter.
    (3) Denying the application. Households that are found to be 
ineligible shall be sent a notice of denial as soon as possible but not 
later than 30 days following the date the application was filed. If the 
household has failed to appear for two scheduled interviews and has made 
no subsequent contact with the State agency to express interest in 
pursuing the application, the State agency shall send the household a 
notice of denial on the 30th day following the date of application. The 
household must file a new application if it wishes to participate in the 
program. In cases where the State agency was able to conduct an 
interview and request all of the necessary verification on the same day 
the application was filed, and no subsequent requests for verification 
have been made, the State agency may also deny the application on the 
30th day if the State agency provided assistance to the household in 
obtaining verification as specified in paragraph (f)(5) of this section, 
but the household failed to provide the requested verification.
    (h) Delays in processing. If the State agency does not determine a 
household's eligibility and provide an opportunity to participate within 
30 days following the date the application was filed, the State agency 
shall take the following action:
    (1) Determining cause. The State agency shall first determine the 
cause of the delay using the following criteria:
    (i) A delay shall be considered the fault of the household if the 
household has failed to complete the application process even though the 
State agency has taken all the action it is required to take to assist 
the household. The State agency must have taken the following actions 
before a delay can be considered the fault of the household:
    (A) For households that have failed to complete the application 
form, the State agency must have offered, or attempted to offer, 
assistance in its completion.
    (B) If one or more members of the household have failed to register 
for work, as required in Sec. 273.7, the State agency must have informed 
the household of the need to register for work and given the household 
at least 10 days from the date of notification to register these 
members.
    (C) In cases where verification is incomplete, the State agency must 
have provided the household with a statement of required verification 
and offered to assist the household in obtaining required verification 
and allowed

[[Page 566]]

the household sufficient time to provide the missing verification. 
Sufficient time shall be at least 10 days from the date of the State 
agency's initial request for the particular verification that was 
missing.
    (D) For households that have failed to appear for an interview, the 
State agency must have attempted to reschedule the initial interview 
within 30 days following the date the application was filed. However, if 
the household has failed to appear for the first interview and a 
subsequent interview is postponed at the household's request or cannot 
otherwise be rescheduled until after the 20th day but before the 30th 
day following the date the application was filed, the household must 
appear for the interview, bring verification, and register members for 
work by the 30th day; otherwise, the delay shall be the fault of the 
household. If the household has failed to appear for the first interview 
and a subsequent interview is postponed at the household's request until 
after the 30th day following the date the application was filed, the 
delay shall be the fault of the household. If the household has missed 
both scheduled interviews and requests another interview, any delay 
shall be the fault of the household.
    (ii) Delays that are the fault of the State agency include, but are 
not limited to, those cases where the State agency failed to take the 
actions described in paragraphs (h)(1)(i) (A) through (D) of this 
section.
    (2) Delays caused by the household. (i) If by the 30th day the State 
agency cannot take any further action on the application due to the 
fault of the household, the household shall lose its entitlement to 
benefits for the month of application. However, the State agency shall 
give the household an additional 30 days to take the required action, 
except that, if verification is lacking, the State agency has the option 
of holding the application pending for only 30 days following the date 
of the initial request for the particular verification that was missing.
    (A) The State agency has the option of sending the household either 
a notice of denial or a notice of pending status on the 30th day. The 
option chosen may vary from one project area to another, provided the 
same procedures apply to all households within a project area. However, 
if a notice of denial is sent and the household takes the required 
action within 60 days following the date the application was filed, the 
State agency shall reopen the case without requiring a new application. 
No further action by the State agency is required after the notice of 
denial or pending status is sent if the household failed to take the 
required action within 60 days following the date the application was 
filed, or if the State agency chooses the option of holding the 
application pending for only 30 days following the date of the initial 
request for the particular verification that was missing, and the 
household fails to provide the necessary verification by this 30th day.
    (B) State agencies may include in the notice a request that the 
household report all changes in circumstances since it filed its 
application. The information that must be contained on the notice of 
denial or pending status is explained in Sec. 273.10(g)(1) (ii) and 
(iii).
    (ii) If the household was at fault for the delay in the first 30-day 
period, but is found to be eligible during the second 30-day period, the 
State agency shall provide benefits only from the month following the 
month of application. The household is not entitled to benefits for the 
month of application when the delay was the fault of the household.
    (3) Delays caused by the State agency. (i) Whenever a delay in the 
initial 30-day period is the fault of the State agency, the State agency 
shall take immediate corrective action. Except as specified in 
Secs. 273.2(f)(1)(ii)(F) and 273.2(f)(10)(i), the State agency shall not 
deny the application if it caused the delay, but shall instead notify 
the household by the 30th day following the date the application was 
filed that its application is being held pending. The State agency shall 
also notify the household of any action it must take to complete the 
application process. If verification is lacking the State agency has the 
option of holding the application pending for only 30 days following the 
date of the initial request for the particular verification that was 
missing.

[[Page 567]]

    (ii) If the household is found to be eligible during the second 30-
day period, the household shall be entitled to benefits retroactive to 
the month of application. If, however, the household is found to be 
ineligible, the State agency shall deny the application.
    (4) Delays beyond 60 days. (i) If the State agency is at fault for 
not completing the application process by the end of the second 30-day 
period, and the case file is otherwise complete, the State agency shall 
continue to process the original application until an eligibility 
determination is reached. If the household is determined eligible, and 
the State agency was at fault for the delay in the initial 30 days, the 
household shall receive benefits retroactive to the month of 
application. However, if the initial delay was the household's fault, 
the household shall receive benefits retroactive only to the month 
following the month of application. The State agency may use the 
original application to determine the household's eligibility in the 
months following the 60-day period, or it may require the household to 
file a new application.
    (ii) If the State agency is at fault for not completing the 
application process by the end of the second 30-day period, but the case 
file is not complete enough to reach an eligibility determination, the 
State agency may continue to process the original application, or deny 
the case and notify the household to file a new application. If the case 
is denied, the household shall also be advised of its possible 
entitlement to benefits lost as a result of State agency caused delays 
in accordance with Sec. 273.17. If the State agency was also at fault 
for the delay in the initial 30 days, the amount of benefits lost would 
be calculated from the month of application. If, however, the household 
was at fault for the initial delay, the amount of benefits lost would be 
calculated from the month following the month of application.
    (iii) If the household is at fault for not completing the 
application process by the end of the second 30-day period, the State 
agency shall deny the application and require the household to file a 
new application if it wishes to participate. If however, the State 
agency has chosen the option of holding the application pending only 
until 30 days following the date of the initial request for the 
particular verification that was missing, and verification is not 
received by that 30th day, the State agency may immediately close the 
application. A notice of denial need not be sent if the notice of 
pending status informed the household that it would have to file a new 
application if verification was not received within 30 days of the 
initial request. The household shall not be entitled to any lost 
benefits, even if the delay in the initial 30 days was the fault of the 
State agency.
    (i) Expedited service--(1) Entitlement to expedited service. The 
following households are entitled to expedited service:
    (i) Households with less than $150 in monthly gross income, as 
computed in Sec. 273.10 provided their liquid resources (i.e., cash on 
hand, checking or savings accounts, savings certificates, and lump sum 
payments as specified in Sec. 273.9(c)(8)) do not exceed $100;
    (ii) Migrant or seasonal farmworker households who are destitute as 
defined in Sec. 273.10(e)(3) provided their liquid resources (i.e., cash 
on hand, checking or savings accounts, savings certificates, and lump 
sum payments as specified in Sec. 273.9(c)(8)) do not exceed $100;
    (iii) Households in which all members are ``homeless individuals'' 
as defined in Sec. 271.2 and which meet the monthly income eligibility 
test required under Sec. 273.9(a) and the maximum resource test 
specified in Sec. 273.8(a); or
    (iv) Households whose combined monthly gross income and liquid 
resources are less than the household's monthly rent or mortgage, and 
utilities (including entitlement to a SUA, as appropriate, in accordance 
with Sec. 273.9(d)).
    (2) Identifying households needing expedited service. The State 
agency's application procedures shall be designed to identify households 
eligible for expedited service at the time the household requests 
assistance. For example, a receptionist, volunteer, or other employee 
shall be responsible for screening applications as they are filed or as 
individuals come in to apply.
    (3) Processing standards. All households receiving expedited 
service, except those receiving it during months

[[Page 568]]

in which allotments are suspended or cancelled, shall have their cases 
processed in accordance with the following provisions. Those households 
receiving expedited service during suspensions or cancellations shall 
have their cases processed in accordance with the provisions of 
Sec. 271.7(e)(2).
    (i) General. For households entitled to expedited service, the State 
agency shall make available to the recipient coupons or an ATP card not 
later than the fifth calendar day following the date an application was 
filed. For a resident of a public institution who applies for benefits 
prior to his/her release from the institution in accordance with 
Sec. 273.1(e)(2) and who is entitled to expedited service, the date of 
filing of his/her food stamp application is the date of release of the 
applicant from the institution. Whatever system a State agency uses to 
ensure meeting this delivery standard shall be designed to allow a 
reasonable opportunity for redemption of ATPs no later than the fifth 
calendar day following the day the application was filed.
    (ii) Drug addicts and alcoholics, group living arrangement 
facilities. For residents of drug addiction or alcoholic treatment and 
rehabilitation centers and residents of group living arrangements who 
are entitled to expedited service, the State agency shall make available 
to the recipient coupons or an ATP card not later than the 5 calendar 
days following the date an application was filed.
    (iii) Out-of-office interviews. If a household is entitled to 
expedited service and is also entitled to a waiver of the office 
interview, the State agency shall conduct the interview (unless the 
household cannot be reached) and complete the application process within 
the expedited service standards. The first day of this count is the 
calendar day following application filing. If the State agency conducts 
a telephone interview and must mail the application to the household for 
signature, the mailing time involved will not be calculated in the 
expedited service standards. Mailing time shall only include the days 
the application is in the mail to and from the household and the days 
the application is in the household's possession pending signature and 
mailing.
    (iv) Late determinations. If the prescreening required in paragraph 
(i)(2) of this section fails to identify a household as being entitled 
to expedited service and the State agency subsequently discovers that 
the household is entitled to expedited service, the State agency shall 
provide expedited service to households within the processing standards 
described in paragraphs (i)(3) (i) and (ii) of this section, except that 
the processing standard shall be calculated from the date the State 
agency discovers the household is entitled to expedited service.
    (v) Residents of shelters for battered women and children. Residents 
of shelters for battered women and children who are otherwise entitled 
to expedited service shall be handled in accordance with the time limits 
in paragraph (i)(3)(i) of this section.
    (4) Special procedures for expediting service. The State agency 
shall use the following procedures when expediting certification and 
issuance:
    (i) In order to expedite the certification process, the State agency 
shall use the following procedures:
    (A) In all cases, the applicant's identity (i.e., the identity of 
the person making the application) shall be verified through a 
collateral contact or readily available documentary evidence as 
specified in paragraph (f)(1) of this section.
    (B) All reasonable efforts shall be made to verify within the 
expedited processing standards, the household's residency in accordance 
with Sec. 273.2(f)(1)(vi), income statement (including a statement that 
the household has no income), liquid resources and all other factors 
required by Sec. 273.2(f), through collateral contacts or readily 
available documentary evidence. However, benefits shall not be delayed 
beyond the delivery standards prescribed in paragraph (i)(3) of this 
section, solely because these eligibility factors have not been 
verified.

State agencies also may verify factors other than identity, residency, 
and income provided that verification can be accomplished within 
expedited processing standards. State agencies should attempt to obtain 
as much additional

[[Page 569]]

verification as possible during the interview, but should not delay the 
certification of households entitled to expedited service for the full 
timeframes specified in paragraph (i)(3) of this section when the State 
agency has determined it is unlikely that other verification can be 
obtained within these timeframes. Households entitled to expedited 
service will be asked to furnish a social security number for each 
person or apply for one for each person before the second full month of 
participation. Those household members unable to provide the required 
SSN's or who do not have one prior to the second full month of 
participation shall be allowed to continue to participate only if they 
satisfy the good cause requirements with respect to SSN's specified in 
Sec. 273.6(d), except that households with a newborn may have up to 6 
months following the month the baby was born to supply an SSN or proof 
of an application for an SSN for the newborn in accordance with 
Sec. 273.6(b)(4). The State agency may attempt to register other 
household members but shall postpone the registration of other household 
members if it cannot be accomplished within the expedited service 
timeframes. With regard to the work registration requirements specified 
in Sec. 273.7, the State agency shall, at a minimum, require the 
applicant to register (unless exempt or unless the household has 
designated an authorized representative to apply on its behalf in 
accordance with Sec. 273.1(f)). The State agency may attempt 
registration of other household members by requesting that the applicant 
complete the work registration forms for other household members to the 
best of his or her ability. The State agency may also attempt to 
accomplish work registration for other household members in a timely 
manner through other means, such as calling the household. The State 
agency may attempt to verify questionable work registration exemptions, 
but such verification shall be postponed if the expedited service 
timeframes cannot be met.
    (ii) Once an acceptable collateral contact has been designated, the 
State agency shall promptly contact the collateral contact, in 
accordance with the provisions of paragraph (f)(4)(ii) of this section. 
Although the household has the primary responsibility for providing 
other types of verification, the State agency shall assist the household 
in promptly obtaining the necessary verification.
    (iii) Households that are certified on an expedited basis and have 
provided all necessary verification required in paragraph (f) of this 
section prior to certification shall be assigned normal certification 
periods. If verification was postponed, the State agency may certify 
these households for the month of application (the month of application 
and the subsequent month for those households applying after the 15th of 
the month) or, at the State agency's option, may assign normal 
certification periods to those households whose circumstances would 
otherwise warrant longer certification periods. State agencies, at their 
option, may request any household eligible for expedited service which 
applies after the 15th of the month and is certified for the month of 
application and the subsequent month only to submit a second application 
(at the time of the initial certification) if the household's 
verification is postponed.
    (A) For households applying on or before the 15th of the month, the 
State agency may assign a one-month certification period or assign a 
normal certification period. Satisfaction of the verification 
requirements may be postponed until the second month of participation. 
If a one-month certification period is assigned, the notice of 
eligibility may be combined with the notice of expiration or a separate 
notice may be sent. The notice of eligibility must explain that the 
household has to satisfy all verification requirements that were 
postponed. For subsequent months, the household must reapply and satisfy 
all verification requirements which were postponed or be certified under 
normal processing standards. If the household does not satisfy the 
postponed verification requirements and does not appear for the 
interview, the State agency does not need to contact the household 
again.
    (B) For households applying after the 15th of the month, the State 
agency may assign a 2-month certification period or a normal 
certification period of

[[Page 570]]

no more than 12 months. Verification may be postponed until the third 
month of participation, if necessary, to meet the expedited timeframe. 
If a two-month certification period is assigned, the notice of 
eligibility may be combined with the notice of expiration or a separate 
notice may be sent. The notice of eligibility must explain that the 
household is obligated to satisfy the verification requirements that 
were postponed. For subsequent months, the household must reapply and 
satisfy the verification requirements which were postponed or be 
certified under normal processing standards. If the household does not 
satisfy the postponed verification requirements and does not attend the 
interview, the State agency does not need to contact the household 
again. When a certification period of longer than 2 months is assigned 
and verification is postponed, households must be sent a notice of 
eligibility advising that no benefits for the third month will be issued 
until the postponed verification requirements are satisfied. The notice 
must also advise the household that if the verification process results 
in changes in the household's eligibility or level of benefits, the 
State agency will act on those changes without advance notice of adverse 
action.
    (C) Households which apply for initial benefits (as described in 
Sec. 273.10(a)) after the 15th of the month, are entitled to expedited 
service, have completed the application process, and have been 
determined eligible to receive benefits for the initial month and the 
next subsequent month, shall receive a combined allotment consisting of 
prorated benefits for the initial month of application and benefits for 
the first full month of participation within the expedited service 
timeframe. If necessary, verification shall be postponed to meet the 
expedited timeframe. The benefits shall be issued in accordance with 
Sec. 274.2(c) of this chapter.
    (D) The provisions of paragraph (i)(4)(iii)(C) of this section do 
not apply to households which have been determined ineligible to receive 
benefits for the month of application or the following month, or to 
households which have not satisfied the postponed verification 
requirements. However, households eligible for expedited service may 
receive benefits for the initial month and next subsequent month under 
the verification standards of paragraph (i)(4) of this section.
    (E) If the State agency chooses to exercise the option to require a 
second application in accordance with paragraph (i)(4)(iii) of this 
section and receives the application before the third month, it shall 
not deny the application but hold it pending until the third month. The 
State agency will issue the third month's benefits within 5 working days 
from receipt of the necessary verification information but not before 
the first day of the month. If the postponed verification requirements 
are not completed before the end of the third month, the State agency 
shall terminate the household's participation and shall issue no further 
benefits.
    (iv) There is no limit to the number of times a household can be 
certified under expedited procedures, as long as prior to each expedited 
certification, the household either completes the verification 
requirements that were postponed at the last expedited certification or 
was certified under normal processing standards since the last expedited 
certification. The provisions of this section shall not apply at 
recertification if a household reapplies before the end of its current 
certification period.
    (v) Households requesting, but not entitled to, expedited service 
shall have their applications processed according to normal standards.
    (j) PA, GA and categorically eligible households. Households 
applying for public assistance (PA) shall be notified of their right to 
apply for food stamp benefits at the same time and shall be allowed to 
apply for food stamp benefits at the same time they apply for PA 
benefits. The applications of these households shall be processed in 
accordance with the requirements of paragraph (j)(1) of this section, 
and their eligibility shall be based solely on food stamp eligibility 
criteria unless the household is categorically eligible, as provided in 
paragraph (j)(2) of this section. If a State has a single

[[Page 571]]

Statewide GA application form, households in which all members are 
included in a State or local GA grant shall have their application for 
food stamps included in the GA application form. State agencies shall 
use the joint application processing procedures described in paragraph 
(j)(1) of this section for GA recipients in accordance with paragraph 
(j)(3) of this section. The eligibility of jointly processed GA 
households shall be based solely on food stamp eligibility criteria 
unless the household is categorically eligible as provided in paragraph 
(j)(4) of this section. The benefit levels of all households shall be 
based solely on food stamp criteria. Jointly processed and categorically 
eligible households shall be certified in accordance with food stamp 
procedural, timeliness, and notice requirements, including the 5-day 
expedited service provisions of Sec. 273.2(i) and normal 30-day 
application processing standards of Sec. 273.2(g). Individuals 
authorized to receive PA, SSI, or GA benefits but who have not yet 
received payment are considered recipients of benefits from those 
programs. In addition, individuals are considered recipients of PA, SSI, 
or GA if their PA, SSI, or GA benefits are suspended or recouped. 
Individuals entitled to PA, SSI, or GA benefits but who are not paid 
such benefits because the grant is less than a minimum benefit are also 
considered recipients. Individuals not receiving GA, PA, or SSI benefits 
who are entitled to Medicaid only shall not be considered recipients.
    (1) Applicant PA households. (i) The application for PA shall 
contain all the information necessary to determine a household's food 
stamp eligibility and level of benefits. Information relevant only to 
food stamp eligibility shall be contained in the PA form or shall be an 
attachment to it. The joint PA/food stamp application shall clearly 
indicate that the household is providing information for both programs, 
is subject to the criminal penalties of both programs for making false 
statements, waives the notice of adverse action as specified by both 
programs for making false statements, and waives the notice of adverse 
action as specified in paragraph (j)(1)(iv) of this section. The joint 
PA/food stamp application may be used for all food stamp applicants 
provided the application form is approved for all households by FCS.
    (ii) The State agency shall conduct a single interview at initial 
application for both public assistance and food stamp purposes. PA 
households shall not be required to see a different eligibility worker 
or otherwise be subjected to two interview requirements to obtain the 
benefits of both programs. Following the single interview, the 
application may be processed by separate workers to determine 
eligibility and benefit levels for food stamps and public assistance. A 
household's eligibility for food stamp out-of-office interview 
provisions in Sec. 273.2(e)(2) does not relieve the household of any 
responsibility for a face-to-face interview to be certified for PA.
    (iii) For households applying for both public assistance and food 
stamps, the verification procedures described in paragraphs (f)(1) 
through (f)(8) of this section shall be followed for those factors of 
eligibility which are needed solely for purposes of determining the 
household's eligibility for food stamps. For those factors of 
eligibility which are needed to determine both PA eligibility and food 
stamp eligibility, the State agency may use the PA verification rules. 
However, the State agency shall not delay the household's food stamp 
benefits if, at the end of 30 days following the date the application 
was filed, the State agency has sufficient verification to meet the 
verification requirements of paragraphs (f)(1) through (f)(8) of this 
section but does not have sufficient verification to meet the PA 
verification rules.
    (iv) In order to determine if a household will be eligible due to 
its status as a recipient PA/SSI household, the State agency may 
temporarily postpone, within the 30-day processing standard, the food 
stamp eligibility determination if the household is not entitled to 
expedited service and appears to be categorically eligible. However, the 
State agency shall postpone denying a potentially categorically eligible 
household until the 30th day in case the household is determined 
eligible to receive PA benefits. Once the PA application is approved, 
the household is to be considered categorically eligible if

[[Page 572]]

it meets all the criteria concerning categorical eligibility in 
Sec. 273.2(j)(2). If the State agency can anticipate the amount and the 
date of receipt of the initial PA payment, but the payment will not be 
received until a subsequent month, the State agency shall vary the 
household's food stamp benefit level according to the anticipated 
receipt of the payment and notify the household. Portions of initial PA 
payments intended to retroactively cover a previous month shall be 
disregarded as lump sum payments under Sec. 273.9(c)(8). If the amount 
or date of receipt of the initial PA payment cannot be reasonably 
anticipated at the time of the food stamp eligibility determination, the 
PA payments shall be handled as a change in circumstances. However, the 
State agency is not required to send a notice of adverse action if the 
receipt of the PA grant reduces, suspends or terminates the household's 
food stamp benefits, provided the household is notified in advance that 
its benefits may be reduced, suspended, or terminated when the grant is 
received. The case may be terminated if the household is not 
categorically eligible. The State agency shall ensure that the denied 
application of a potentially categorically eligible household is easily 
retrievable. For a household filing a joint application for food stamps 
and PA benefits or a household that has a PA application pending and is 
denied food stamps but is later determined eligible to receive PA 
benefits and is otherwise categorically eligible, the State agency shall 
provide benefits using the original application and any other pertinent 
information occurring subsequent to that application. Except for 
residents of public institutions who apply jointly for SSI and food 
stamp benefits prior to their release from a public institution in 
accordance with Sec. 273.1(e)(2), benefits shall be paid from the 
beginning of the period for which PA or SSI benefits are paid, the 
original food stamp application date, or December 23, 1985 whichever is 
later. Residents of public institutions who apply jointly for SSI and 
food stamp benefits prior to their release from the institution shall be 
paid benefits from the date of their release from the institution. In 
situations where the State agency must update and reevaluate the 
original application of a denied case, the State agency shall not 
reinterview the household, but shall use any available information to 
update the application. The State agency shall then contact the 
household by phone or mail to explain and confirm changes made by the 
State agency and to determine if other changes in household 
circumstances have occurred. If any information obtained from the 
household differs from that which the State agency obtained from 
available information or the household provided additional changes in 
information, the State agency shall arrange for the household or it 
authorized representative to initial all changes, re-sign and date the 
updated application and provide necessary verification. In no event can 
benefits be provided prior to the date of the original food stamp 
application filed on or after December 23, 1985. Any household that is 
determined to be eligible to receive PA benefits for a period of time 
within the 30-day food stamp processing time, shall be provided food 
stamp benefits back to the date of the food stamp application. However, 
in no event shall food stamp benefits be paid for a month for which such 
household is ineligible for receipt of any PA benefits for the month, 
unless the household is eligible for food stamp benefits and an NPA 
case. Benefits shall be prorated in accordance with 
Sec. 273.10(a)(1)(ii) and (e)(2)(ii)(B). Household that file joint 
applications that are found categorically eligible after being denied 
NPA food stamps shall have their benefits for the initial month prorated 
from the date from which the PA benefits are payable, or the date of the 
original food stamp application, whichever is later. The State agency 
shall act on reevaluating the original application either at the 
household's request or when it becomes otherwise aware of the 
household's PA and/or SSI eligibility. The household shall be informed 
on the notice of denial required by Sec. 273.10(g)(1)(ii) to notify the 
State agency if its PA or SSI benefits are approved.
    (v) Households whose PA applications are denied shall not be 
required to file new food stamp applications but shall

[[Page 573]]

have their food stamp eligibility determined or continued on the basis 
of the original applications filed jointly for PA and food stamp 
purposes and any other documented information obtained subsequent to the 
application which may have been used in the PA determination and which 
is relevant to food stamp eligibility or level of benefits.
    (2) Categorically eligible PA and SSI households. (i) Any household 
(except those listed in paragraph (j)(2)(iii) of this section) in which 
all members receive or are authorized to receive PA and/or SSI benefits 
shall be considered eligible for food stamps because of their status as 
PA and/or SSI recipients unless the entire household is 
institutionalized as defined in Sec. 273.1(e) or disqualified for any 
reason from receiving food stamps. Residents of public institutions who 
apply jointly for SSI and food stamp benefits prior to their release 
from the institution in accordance with Sec. 273.1(e)(2), shall not be 
categorically eligible upon a finding by SSA of potential SSI 
eligibility prior to such release. The individuals shall be considered 
categorically eligible at such time as a final SSI eligibility 
determination has been made and the individual has been released from 
the institution. The eligibility factors which are deemed for food stamp 
eligibility without the verification required in Sec. 273.2(f) because 
of PA/SSI status are the resource, gross and net income limits; social 
security number information; sponsored alien information; and residency. 
If any of the following factors are questionable, the State agency shall 
verify, in accordance with Sec. 273.2(f), that the household which is 
considered categorically eligible:
    (A) Contains only members that are PA or SSI recipients as defined 
in the introductory paragraph Sec. 273.2(j);
    (B) Meets the household definition in Sec. 273.1(a);
    (C) Includes all persons who purchase and prepare food together in 
one food stamp household regardless of whether or not they are separate 
units for PA or SSI purposes; and
    (D) Includes no persons who have been disqualified as provided for 
in paragraph (j)(2)(iii) of this section.
    (ii) Households subject to retrospective budgeting that have been 
suspended for PA purposes as provided for in Aid to Families with 
Dependent Children (AFDC) regulations, or that receive zero benefits 
shall continue to be considered as authorized to receive benefits from 
the appropriate agency. Categorical eligibility shall be assumed at 
recertification in the absence of a timely PA redetermination. If a 
recertified household is subsequently terminated from PA benefits, the 
procedures in Sec. 273.12(f)(3), (4), and (5) shall be followed, as 
appropriate.
    (iii) Under no circumstances shall any household be considered 
categorically eligible if:
    (A) Any member of that household is disqualified for an intentional 
Program violation in accordance with Sec. 273.16 or for failure to 
comply with monthly reporting requirements in accordance with 
Sec. 273.21;
    (B) The entire household is disqualified because one or more of its 
members failed to comply with workfare in accordance with Sec. 273.22; 
or
    (C) The head of the household is disqualified for failure to comply 
with the work requirements in accordance with Sec. 273.7.
    (iv) These households are subject to all food stamp eligibility and 
benefits provisions (including the provisions of Sec. 273.11(c)) and 
cannot be reinstated in the Program on the basis of categorical 
eligibility provisions.
    (v) No person shall be included as a member in any household which 
is otherwise categorically eligible if that person is:
    (A) An ineligible alien as defined in Sec. 273.4;
    (B) Ineligible under the student provisions in Sec. 273.5;
    (C) An SSI recipient in a cash-out State as defined in Sec. 273.20; 
or
    (D) Institutionalized in a nonexempt facility as defined in 
Sec. 273.1(e).
    (E) Ineligible because of failure to comply with a work requirement 
of Sec. 273.7.
    (vi) For the purposes of work registration, the exemptions in 
Sec. 273.7(b) shall be applied to individuals in categorically eligible 
households. Any such individual who is not exempt from

[[Page 574]]

work registration is subject to the other work requirements in 
Sec. 273.7.
    (vii) When determining eligibility for a categorically eligible 
household all provisions of this subchapter except for those listed 
below shall apply:
    (A) Section 273.8 except for the last sentence of paragraph (a).
    (B) Section 273.9(a) except for the fourth sentence in the 
introductory paragraph.
    (C) Section 273.10(a)(1)(i).
    (D) Section 273.10(b).
    (E) Section 273.10(c) for the purposes of eligibility.
    (F) Section 273.10(e)(2)(iii)(A).
    (3) Applicant GA households. (i) State agencies shall use the joint 
application processing procedures in paragraph (j)(1) of this section 
for GA households, except for the effective date of categorical 
eligibility, when the criteria in paragraphs (j)(3)(i) (A) and (B) of 
this section are met. Benefits for GA households that are categorically 
eligible, as provided in paragraph (j)(4) of this section, shall be 
provided from the date of the original food stamp application, the 
beginning of the period for which GA benefits are authorized, or the 
effective date of State GA categorical eligibility (February 1, 1991) or 
local GA categorical eligibility (August 1, 1992), whichever is later:
    (A) The State agency administers a GA program which uses formalized 
application procedures and eligibility criteria that test levels of 
income and resources; and,
    (B) Administration of the GA program is integrated with the 
administration of the PA or food stamp programs, in that the same 
eligibility workers process applications for GA benefits and PA or food 
stamp benefits.
    (ii) State agencies in which different eligibility workers process 
applications for GA benefits and PA or food stamp benefits, but 
procedures otherwise meet the criteria in paragraph (j)(3)(i) of this 
section may, with FCS approval, jointly process GA and food stamp 
applications. If approved, State agencies shall adhere to the joint 
application processing procedures in paragraph (j)(1) of this section, 
except for the effective date of categorical eligibility for GA 
households. Benefits shall be provided GA households that are 
categorically eligible, as provided in paragraph (j)(4) of this section, 
from the date of the original food stamp application, the beginning of 
the period for which GA benefits are authorized, or the effective date 
of State GA categorical eligibility (February 1, 1992) or local GA 
categorical eligibility (August 1, 1992), whichever is later.
    (iii) Requirements for combining the GA and food stamp application 
forms or providing food stamp application forms to GA applicant 
households depend on the extent to which application forms and 
administration of the GA and food stamp programs are integrated.
    (A) State agencies that have a single Statewide GA application form 
shall include the food stamp application form in the GA application form 
and shall inform GA applicant households that they may be categorically 
eligible for food stamps. The joint GA and food stamp application form 
shall clearly indicate that the household is providing information for 
both programs and is subject to the criminal penalties of both programs 
for making false statements. The application form must also notify the 
household that if food stamp benefits are issued before the GA is 
approved, the food stamp benefits may be reduced without further notice 
when the GA assistance is approved (as specified in Sec. 273.2(j)(1)(iv) 
and Sec. 273.13(b)(6)). With FCS approval, the joint GA and food stamp 
application form may be used for households applying only for food 
stamps.
    (B) State agencies that do not have a single Statewide GA 
application form but have local offices in which the same agency 
administers both the GA program and the Food Stamp Program shall provide 
households applying for a local GA grant with a food stamp application 
form at the time of their application for GA, along with information 
concerning how to apply for food stamps, and information about possible 
categorical eligibility.
    (C) If GA and the Food Stamp Program are administered by separate 
offices and a single application form is not required, the State agency 
shall encourage the agencies administering GA to refer GA applicants to 
the local food stamp office or provide applicant

[[Page 575]]

households with food stamp application forms and inform GA applicants of 
their potential categorical eligibility for food stamps. State agencies 
may allow GA applicants to leave a food stamp application form at the GA 
office which contains, at a minimum, the applicant's name, address and 
signature. If the GA office accepts a food stamp application form, it is 
responsible for forwarding the application form the same day to the 
appropriate food stamp office for processing. The procedural and 
timeliness requirements that apply to the application process shall 
begin when the food stamp office receives the application form. The GA 
office may advise households that they may receive faster service if 
they take the application form directly to the food stamp office.
    (D) In areas where GA programs are administered by agencies such as 
the Bureau of Indian Affairs of the Department of the Interior, the 
State agency shall endeavor to gain the cooperation of the agencies in 
referring GA applicants to the food stamp office. Where possible, this 
referral should consist of informing the GA applicants of their 
potential eligibility for food stamp benefits, providing them with food 
stamp applications and directing them to the local food stamp office.
    (4) Categorically eligible GA households. Households in which each 
member receives benefits from a State or local GA program which meets 
the criteria for conferring categorical eligibility in paragraph 
(j)(4)(i) of this section shall be categorically eligible for food 
stamps unless the individual or household is ineligible as specified in 
paragraph (j)(4)(iv) and (j)(4)(v) of this section.
    (i) Certification of qualifying programs. Recipients of benefits 
from programs that meet the criteria in paragraphs (j)(4)(i)(A) through 
(j)(4(i)(C) of this section shall be considered categorically eligible 
to receive benefits from the Food Stamp Program. If a program does not 
meet all of these criteria, the State agency may submit a program 
description to the appropriate FCS regional office for a determination. 
The description should contain, at a minimum, the type of assistance 
provided, the income eligibility standard, and the period for which the 
assistance is provided.
    (A) The program must have income standards which do not exceed the 
gross income eligibility standard in Sec. 273.9(a)(1). The rules of the 
GA program apply in determining countable income.
    (B) The program must provide GA benefits as defined in Sec. 271.2 of 
this part.
    (C) The program must provide benefits which are not limited to one-
time emergency assistance.
    (ii) Verification requirements. In determining whether a household 
is categorically eligible, the State agency shall verify that each 
member receives PA benefits, SSI, or GA from a program that meets the 
criteria in paragraph (j)(4)(i) section or that has been certified by 
FCS as an appropriate program and that it includes no individuals who 
have been disqualified as provided in paragraph (j)(4)(iv) or (j)(2)(v) 
of this section. The State agency shall also verify household 
composition if it is questionable, in accordance with Sec. 273.2(f), in 
order to determine that the household meets the definition of a 
household in Sec. 273.1(a).
    (iii) Deemed eligibility factors. When determining eligibility for a 
categorically eligible household, all Food Stamp Program requirements 
apply except the following:
    (A) Resources. None of the provisions of Sec. 273.8 apply to 
categorically eligible households except the second sentence of 
Sec. 273.8(a) pertaining to categorical eligibility and Sec. 273.8(i) 
concerning transfer of resources. The provision in Sec. 273.10(b) 
regarding resources available the time of the interview does not apply 
to categorically eligible households.
    (B) Gross and net income limits. None of the provisions in 
Sec. 273.9(a) relating to income eligibility standards apply to 
categorically eligible households, except the fourth sentence pertaining 
to categorical eligibility. The provisions in Secs. 273.10(a)(1)(i) and 
273.10(c) relating to the income eligibility determination also do not 
apply to categorically eligible households.

[[Page 576]]

    (C) Zero benefit households. The provision of 
Sec. 273.10(e)(2)(iii)(A) which allows a State agency to deny the 
application of a household with three or more members entitled to no 
benefits because its net income exceeds the level at which benefits are 
issued does not apply to categorically eligible households. All eligible 
households of one or two persons must be provided the minimum benefit, 
as required by Sec. 273.10(e)(2)(ii)(C).
    (D) Residency.
    (E) Sponsored alien information.
    (iv) Ineligible household members. No person shall be included as a 
member of an otherwise categorically eligible household if that person 
is:
    (A) An ineligible alien, as defined in Sec. 273.4;
    (B) An ineligible student, as defined in Sec. 273.5;
    (C) Disqualified for failure to provide or apply for an SSN, as 
required by Sec. 273.6;
    (D) A household member, not the head of household, disqualified for 
failure to comply with a work requirement of Sec. 273.7;
    (E) Disqualified for intentional program violation, as required by 
Sec. 273.16;
    (F) An SSI recipient in a cash-out State, as defined in Sec. 273.20; 
or
    (G) An individual who is institutionalized in a nonexempt facility, 
as defined in Sec. 273.1(e).
    (v) Ineligible households. A household shall not be considered 
categorically eligible if:
    (A) It refuses to cooperate in providing information to the State 
agency that is necessary for making a determination of its eligibility 
or for completing any subsequent review of its eligibility, as described 
in Sec. 273.2(d) and Sec. 273.21(m)(1)(ii);
    (B) The household is disqualified because the head of household 
fails to comply with a work requirement of Sec. 273.7;
    (C) The household is ineligible under the striker provisions of 
Sec. 273.1(g); or
    (D) The household is ineligible because it knowingly transferred 
resources for the purpose of qualifying or attempting to qualify for the 
Program, as provided in Sec. 273.8(i).
    (vi) Combination households. Households consisting entirely of 
recipients of PA, SSI and/or GA from a program that meets the 
requirements of Sec. 273.2(j)(4)(i) shall be categorically eligible in 
accordance with the provisions for paragraphs (j)(2)(iii) and (j)(2)(v) 
of this section for members receiving PA and SSI or provisions of 
paragraphs (j)(4) (iv) and (v) of this section for members receiving GA.
    (5) Households with some PA or GA recipients. State agencies that 
use the joint application processing procedures in paragraphs (j)(1) and 
(j)(3) of this section may apply these procedures to a food stamp 
applicant household in which some, but not all, members are in the PA/GA 
filing unit, except for procedures concerning categorical eligibility. 
If the State agency decides not to use the joint application procedures 
for these households, the households shall file separate applications 
for PA/GA and food stamp benefits. This decision shall not be made on a 
case-by-case basis, but shall be applied uniformly to all households of 
this type in a project area.
    (k) SSI households. For purposes of this paragraph, SSI is defined 
as Federal SSI payments made under title XVI of the Social Security Act, 
federally administered optional supplementary payments under section 
1616 of that Act, or federally administered mandatory supplementary 
payments made under section 212(a) of Pub. L. 93-66. Except in cashout 
States (Sec. 273.20), households which have not applied for food stamps 
in the thirty preceding days, and which do not have applications 
pending, may apply and be certified for food stamp benefits in 
accordance with the procedures described in Sec. 273.2(k)(1)(i) or 
Sec. 273.2(k)(1)(ii) and with the notice, procedural and timeliness 
requirements of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 and its implementing 
regulations. Households applying simultaneously for SSI and food stamps 
shall be subject to food stamp eligibility criteria, and benefit levels 
shall be based solely on food stamp eligibility criteria until the 
household is considered categorically eligible. However, households in 
which all members are either PA or SSI recipients or authorized to 
receive PA or SSI benefits (as discussed in Sec. 273.2(j)) shall be food 
stamp eligible based on their PA/SSI status as

[[Page 577]]

provided for in Sec. 273.2(j)(1)(iv) and (j)(2). Households denied NPA 
food stamps that have an SSI application pending shall be informed on 
the notice of denial of the possibility of categorical eligibility if 
they become SSI recipients. The State agency shall make an eligibility 
determination based on information provided by SSA or by the household.
    (1) Initial application and eligibility determination. At each SSA 
office, the State agency shall either arrange for SSA to complete and 
forward food stamp applications, or the State agency shall outstation 
State food stamp eligibility workers at the SSA Offices with SSA's 
concurrence, based upon an agreement negotiated between the State agency 
and the SSA.
    (i) If the State agency arranges with the SSA to complete and 
forward food stamp applications the following actions shall be taken:
    (A) Whenever a member of a household consisting only of SSI 
applicants or recipients transacts business at an SSA office, the SSA 
shall inform the household of:
    (1) Its right to apply for food stamps at the SSA office without 
going to the food stamp office; and
    (2) Its right to apply at a food stamp office if it chooses to do 
so.
    (B) The SSA will accept and complete food stamp applications 
received at the SSA Office from SSI households and forward them, within 
one working day after receipt of a signed application, to a designated 
office of the State agency. SSA shall also forward to the State agency a 
transmittal form which will be approved by SSA and FCS. The SSA will use 
the national food stamp application form for joint processing. State 
agencies may substitute a State food stamp application, provided that 
prior approval is received from both FCS and SSA. SSA shall approve, 
deny, or comment upon FCS-approved State food stamp applications within 
thirty days of their submission to SSA.
    (C) SSA will accept and complete food stamp applications from SSI 
households received by SSA staff in contact stations. SSA will forward 
all food stamp applications from SSI households to the designated food 
stamp office.
    (D) The SSA staff shall complete joint SSI and food stamp 
applications for residents of public institutions in accordance with 
Sec. 273.1(e)(2).
    (E) The State agency shall designate an address for the SSA to 
forward food stamp applications and accompanying information to the 
State agency for eligibility determination. Applications and 
accompanying information must be forwarded to the agreed upon address in 
accordance with the time standards contained in Sec. 273.2(k)(1)(i)(B).
    (F) Except for applications taken in accordance with paragraph 
(k)(1)(i)(D) of this section, the State agency shall make an eligibility 
determination and issue food stamp benefits to eligible SSI households 
within 30 days following the date the application was received by the 
SSA. Applications shall be considered filed for normal processing 
purposes when the signed application is received by SSA. The expedited 
processing time standards shall begin on the date the State agency 
receives a food stamp application. The State agency shall make an 
eligibility determination and issue food stamp benefits to a resident of 
a public institution who applies jointly for SSI and food stamps within 
30 days following the date of the applicant's release from the 
institution. Expedited processing time standards for an applicant who 
has applied for food stamps and SSI prior to release shall also begin on 
the date of the applicant's release from the institution in accordance 
with Sec. 273.2 (i)(3)(i). SSA shall notify the State agency of the date 
of release of the applicant from the institution. If, for any reason, 
the State agency is not notified on a timely basis of the applicant's 
release date, the State agency shall restore benefits in accordance with 
Sec. 273.17 to such applicant back to the date of release. Food stamp 
applications and supporting documentation sent to an incorrect food 
stamp office shall be sent to the correct office, by the State agency, 
within one working day of their receipt in accordance with 
Sec. 273.2(c)(2)(ii).
    (G) Households in which all members are applying for or 
participating in SSI

[[Page 578]]

will not be required to see a State eligibility worker, or otherwise be 
subjected to an additional State interview. The food stamp application 
will be processed by the State agency. The State agency shall not 
contact the household further in order to obtain information for 
certification for food stamp benefits unless: the application is 
improperly completed; mandatory verification required by 
Sec. 273.2(f)(1) is missing; or, the State agency determines that 
certain information on the application is questionable. In no event 
would the applicant be required to appear at the food stamp office to 
finalize the eligibility determination. Further contact made in 
accordance with this paragraph shall not constitute a second food stamp 
certification interview.
    (H) SSA shall refer non-SSI households to the correct food stamp 
office. The State agencies shall process those applications in 
accordance with the procedures noted in Sec. 273.2. Applications from 
such households shall be considered filed on the date the signed 
application is taken at the correct State agency office, and the normal 
and expedited processing time standards shall begin on that date.
    (I) The SSA shall prescreen all applications for entitlement to 
expedited services on the day the application is received at the SSA 
office and shall mark ``Expedited Processing'' on the first page of all 
households' applications that appear to be entitled to such processing. 
The SSA will inform households which appear to meet the criteria for 
expedited service that benfits may be issued a few days sooner if the 
household applies directly at the food stamp office. The household may 
take the application from SSA to the food stamp office for screening, an 
interview, and processing of the application. This provision does not 
apply to applications described in paragraph (k)(1)(i)(D) of this 
section.
    (J) The State agency shall prescreen all applications received from 
the SSA for entitlement to expedited service on the day the application 
is received at the correct food stamp office. All SSI households 
entitled to expedited service shall be certified in accordance with 
Sec. 273.2(i) except that the expedited processing time standard shall 
begin on the date the application is received at the correct State 
agency office, unless the applicant is a resident of a public 
institution as described in Sec. 273.1(e)(2).
    (K) The State agency shall develop and implement a method to 
determine if members of SSI households whose applications are forwarded 
by the SSA are already participating in the Food Stamp Program directly 
through the State agency.
    (L) If SSA takes an SSI application or redetermination on the 
telephone from a member of a pure SSI household, a food stamp 
application shall also be completed during the telephone interview. In 
these cases, the food stamp application shall be mailed to the claimant 
for signature for return to the SSA office or to the State agency. SSA 
shall then forward any food stamp applications it receives to the State 
agency. The State agency may not require the household to be interviewed 
again in the food stamp office. The State agency shall not contact the 
household further in order to obtain information for certification for 
food stamp benefits except in accordance with Sec. 273.2(k)(1)(i)(F).
    (M) To SSI recipients redetermined for SSI by mail, the SSA shall 
send a stuffer informing them of their right to file a food stamp 
application at the SSA office (if they are members of a pure SSI 
household) or at their local food stamp office, and their right to an 
out-of-office food stamp interview to be performed by the State agency 
if the household is unable to appoint an authorized representative.
    (N) Section 272.4 bilingual requirements shall not apply to the 
Social Security Administration.
    (O) State agencies shall provide and SSA shall distribute an 
information sheet or brochure to all households processed under this 
paragraph. This material shall inform the household of the following: 
The address and telephone number of the household's correct food stamp 
office, the remaining actions to be taken in the application process, 
and a statement that a household should be notified of the food stamp 
determinations within thirty days and can contact the food stamp office 
if it receives no notification

[[Page 579]]

within thirty days, or has other questions or problems. It shall also 
include the client's rights and responsibilities (including fair 
hearings, authorized representatives, out-of-office interviews, 
reporting changes and timely reapplication), information on how and 
where to obtain coupons, and how to use coupons (including the 
commodities clients may purchase with coupons).
    (P) As part of the SSA-State agency joint food stamp processing 
agreement, States may negotiate, on behalf of project areas, to have SSA 
provide initial eligibility and payment data where the local area is 
unable to access accurate and timely data through the State's SDX. 
However, in negotiating such agreements, SSA may challenge a State's 
determination that it does not have the computer capability to use SDX 
data. If SSA, FCS, and the State are unable to resolve this matter, and 
SSA determines that a State does have the capability to provide accurate 
and timely SDX data to the food stamp project area, SSA is not required 
to provide alternate means of transmitting initial SSI eligibility and 
payment data.
    (ii) If the State agency chooses to outstation eligibility workers 
at SSA offices, with SSA's concurrence, the following actions shall be 
completed.
    (A) SSA will provide adequate space for State food stamp eligibility 
workers in SSA offices.
    (B) The State agency shall have at least one outstationed worker on 
duty at all time periods during which households will be referred for 
food stamp application processing. In most cases this would require the 
availability of an outstationed worker throughout normal SSA business 
hours.
    (C) The following households shall be entitled to file food stamp 
applications with, and be interviewed by an outstationed eligibility 
worker:
    (1) Households containing an applicant for or recipient of SSI;
    (2) Households which do not have an applicant for or recipient of 
SSI, but which contain an applicant for or recipient of benefits under 
title II of the Social Security Act, if the State agency and SSA have an 
agreement to allow the processing of such households at SSA offices.
    (D) Households shall be interviewed for food stamps on the day of 
application unless there is insufficient time to conduct an interview. 
The State agency shall arrange for the outstationed worker to interview 
applicants as soon as possible.
    (E) The State agency shall not refuse to provide service to persons 
served by the SSA office because they do not reside in the county or 
project area in which the SSA office is located, provided, however, that 
they reside within the jurisdictions served by the SSA office and the 
State agency. The State agency is not required to process the 
applications of persons who are not residing within the SSA office 
jurisdiction but who do reside within the State agency's jurisdiction, 
other than to forward the forms to the correct food stamp offices.
    (F) The State agency may permit the eligibility worker outstationed 
at the SSA to determine the eligibility of households, or may require 
that completed applications be forwarded elsewhere for the eligibility 
determination.
    (G) Applications from households entitled to joint processing 
through an outstationed eligibility worker shall be considered filed on 
the date they are submitted to that worker. Both the normal and 
expedited service time standards shall begin on that date.
    (H) Households not entitled to joint processing shall be entitled to 
obtain and submit applications at the SSA office. The outstationed 
eligibility worker need not process these applications except to forward 
them to the correct food stamp office where they shall be considered 
filed upon receipt (any activities beyond acceptance and referral of the 
application would require SSA concurrence). Both the normal and 
expedited service time standards shall begin on that date.
    (iii) Regardless of whether the State agency or SSA conducts the 
food stamp interview, the following actions shall be taken:
    (A) Verification. (1) The State agency shall ensure that information 
required by Sec. 273.2(f) is verified prior to certification for 
households initially applying. Households entitled to expedited

[[Page 580]]

certification services shall be processed in accordance with 
Sec. 273.2(i).
    (2) The State agency has the option of verifying SSI benefit 
payments through the State Data Exchange (SDX), the Beneficiary Data 
Exchange (BENDEX) and/or through verification provided by the household.
    (3) State agencies may verify other information through SDX and 
BENDEX but only to the extent permitted by data exchange agreements with 
SSA. Information verified through SDX or BENDEX shall not be reverified 
unless it is questionable. Households shall be given the opportunity to 
provide verification from another source if all necessary information is 
not available on the SDX or the BENDEX, or if the SDX/BENDEX information 
is contradictory to other household information.
    (B) Certification period. (1) State agencies shall certify 
households under these procedures for up to twelve months, according to 
the standards in Sec. 273.10(f), except for State agencies which must 
assign the initial certification period to coincide with adjustments to 
the SSI benefit amount as designated in Sec. 273.10(f)(3)(iii).
    (2) In cases jointly processed in which the SSI determination 
results in denial, and the State agency believes that food stamp 
eligibility or benefit levels may be affected, the State agency shall 
send the household a notice of expiration advising that the 
certification period will expire the end of the month following the 
month in which the notice is sent and that it must reapply if it wishes 
to continue to participate. The notice shall also explain that its 
certification period is expiring because of changes in circumstances 
which may affect food stamp eligibility or benefit levels and that the 
household may be entitled to an out-of-office interview, in accordance 
with Sec. 273.2(e)(2).
    (C) Changes in circumstances. (1) Households shall report changes in 
accordance with the requirements in Sec. 273.12. The State agency shall 
process changes in accordance with Sec. 273.12.
    (2) Within ten days of learning of the determination of the 
application for SSI through SDX, the household, advisement from SSA 
where SSA agrees to do so for households processed under 
Sec. 273.2(k)(1)(i), or from any other source, the State agency shall 
take required action in accordance with Sec. 273.12. State agencies are 
encouraged to monitor the results of the SSI determination through SDX 
and BENDEX to the extent practical.
    (3) The State agency shall process adjustments to SSI cases 
resulting from mass changes, in accordance with provisions of 
Sec. 273.12(e).
    (D) SSI households applying at the food stamp office. The State 
agency shall allow SSI households to submit food stamp applications to 
local food stamp offices rather than through the SSA if the household 
chooses. In such cases all verification, including that pertaining to 
SSI program benefits, shall be provided by the household, by SDX or 
BENDEX, or obtained by the State agency rather than being provided by 
the SSA.
    (E) Restoration of lost benefits. The State agency shall restore to 
the household benefits which were lost whenever the loss was caused by 
an error by the State agency or by the Social Security Administration 
through joint processing. Such an error shall include, but not be 
limited to, the loss of an applicant's food stamp application after it 
has been filed with SSA or with a State agency's outstationed worker. 
Lost benefits shall be restored in accordance with Sec. 273.17.
    (2) Recertification. (i) The State agency shall complete the 
application process and approve or deny timely applications for 
recertification in accordance with Sec. 273.14 of the food stamp 
regulations. A face-to-face interview shall be waived if requested by a 
household consisting entirely of SSI participants unable to appoint an 
authorized representative. The State agency shall provide SSI households 
with a notice of expiration in accordance with Sec. 273.14(b), except 
that such notification shall inform households consisting entirely of 
SSI recipients that they are entitled to a waiver of a face-to-face 
interview if the household is unable to appoint an authorized 
representative.
    (ii) Households shall be entitled to make a timely application (in 
accordance with Sec. 273.14(b)(3)) for food stamp

[[Page 581]]

recertification at an SSA office under the following conditions.
    (A) In SSA offices where Sec. 273.2(k)(1)(i) is in effect, SSA shall 
accept the application of a pure SSI household and forward the completed 
application, transmittal form and any available verification to the 
designated food stamp office. Where SSA accepts and refers the 
application in such situations, the household shall not be required to 
appear at a second office interview, although the State agency may 
conduct an out-of-office interview, if necessary.
    (B) In SSA offices where Sec. 273.2(k)(1)(ii) is in effect, the 
outstationed worker shall accept the application and interview the 
recipient and the State agency shall process the application according 
to Sec. 273.14.
    (l) Households applying for or receiving social security benefits. 
An applicant for or recipient of social security benefits under title II 
of the Social Security Act shall be informed at the SSA office of the 
availability of benefits under the Food Stamp Program and the 
availability of a Food Stamp Program application at the SSA office. The 
SSA office is not required to accept applications and conduct interviews 
for title II applicants/recipients in the manner prescribed in 
Sec. 273.2(k) for SSI applicants/recipients unless the State agency has 
chosen to outstation eligibility workers at the SSA office and has an 
agreement with SSA to allow the processing of such households at SSA 
offices. In these cases, processing shall be in accordance with 
Sec. 273.2(k)(1)(ii).
    (m) Households where not all members are applying for or receiving 
SSI. An applicant for or recipient of SSI shall be informed at the SSA 
office of the availability of benefits under the Food Stamp Program and 
the availability of a food stamp application at the SSA office. The SSA 
office is not required to accept applications or to conduct interviews 
for SSI applicants or recipients who are not members of households in 
which all are SSI applicants or recipients unless the State agency has 
chosen to outstation eligibility workers at the SSA office. In this 
case, processing shall be in accordance with Sec. 273.2(k)(1)(ii).

[Amdt. 132, 43 FR 47889, Oct. 17, 1978]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 273.2, 
see the List of CFR Sections Affected in the Finding Aids section of 
this volume.


<R05>
Sec. 273.3  Residency.

    (a) A household shall live in the State in which it files an 
application for participation. The State agency may also require a 
household to file an application for participation in a specified 
project area (as defined in Sec. 271.2 of this chapter) or office within 
the State. No individual may participate as a member of more than one 
household or in more than one project area, in any month, unless an 
individual is a resident of a shelter for battered women and children as 
defined in Sec. 271.2 and was a member of a household containing the 
person who had abused him or her. Residents of shelters for battered 
women and children shall be handled in accordance with Sec. 273.11(g). 
The State agency shall not impose any durational residency requirements. 
The State agency shall not require an otherwise eligible household to 
reside in a permanent dwelling or have a fixed mailing address as a 
condition of eligibility. Nor shall residency require an intent to 
reside permanently in the State or project area. Persons in a project 
area solely for vacation purposes shall not be considered residents.
    (b) When a household moves within the State, the State agency may 
require the household to reapply in the new project area or it may 
transfer the household's casefile to the new project area and continue 
the household's certification without reapplication. If the State agency 
chooses to transfer the case, it shall act on changes in household 
circumstances resulting from the move in accordance with Sec. 273.12(c) 
or Sec. 273.21. It shall also ensure that duplicate participation does 
not occur in accordance with Sec. 272.4(f) of this chapter, and that the 
transfer of a household's case shall not adversely affect the household.

[46 FR 60166, Dec. 8, 1981, as amended by Amdt. 211, 47 FR 53317, Nov. 
26, 1982; Amdt. 269, 51 FR 10785, Mar. 28, 1986; Amdt. 274, 51 FR 18750, 
May 21, 1986; Amdt. 364, 61 FR 54317, Oct. 17, 1996]

[[Page 582]]


<R05>
Sec. 273.4  Citizenship and alien status.

    (a) Citizens and eligible aliens. State agencies shall prohibit 
participation in the program by any person who is not a resident of the 
United States and one of the following:
    (1) A United States citizen.
    (2) An alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence as an 
immigrant as defined in sections 101(a)(15) and 101(a)(20) of the 
Immigration and Nationality Act. However, an alien lawfully admitted for 
permanent residence pursuant to section 245A of the Immigration and 
Nationality Act must be eligible as specified in paragraph (a)(8) of 
this section.
    (3) An alien who entered the United States prior to January 1, 1972 
or some later date as required by law, and has continuously maintained 
residency in the United States since then, and is not ineligible for 
citizenship, but is considered to be lawfully admitted for permanent 
residence as a result of an exercise of discretion by the Attorney 
General pursuant to section 249 of the Immigration and Nationality Act.
    (4) An alien who is qualified for entry pursuant to section 207 or 
208 of the Immigration and Nationality Act.
    (5) An alien granted asylum through an exercise of discretion by the 
Attorney General pursuant to section 208 of the Immigration and 
Nationality Act.
    (6) An alien lawfully present in the United States as a result of an 
exercise of discretion by the Attorney General for emergent reasons or 
reasons deemed strictly in the public interest pursuant to section 
212(d)(5) of the Immigration and Nationality Act, or as a result of a 
grant of parole by the Attorney General.
    (7) An alien living within the United States for whom the Attorney 
General has withheld deportation pursuant to section 243 of the 
Immigration and Nationality Act.
    (8) An alien who is defined as aged, blind or disabled in accordance 
with section 1614(a)(1) of the Social Security Act and is considered to 
be lawfully admitted for temporary or permanent residence pursuant to 
section 245A(b)(1) of the Immigration and Nationality Act. Such aliens 
may obtain lawful permanent resident status under section 245(b)(1) of 
the Immigration and Nationality Act no earlier than November 7, 1988.
    (9) An alien who is, as of June 1, 1987, or thereafter, a special 
agricultural worker and lawfully admitted for temporary residence in 
accordance with section 210(a) of the Immigration and Nationality Act.
    (b) Ineligible aliens. Aliens other than those described in 
paragraph (a) of this section shall not be eligible to participate. This 
includes, but is not limited to, alien visitors, tourists, diplomats and 
students who enter the United States temporarily with no intention of 
abandoning their residence in a foreign country.
    (c) Income and resources. The income and resources of an ineligible 
alien shall be handled as outlined in Sec. 273.11(c)(2).
    (d) Awaiting verification. If verification of eligible alien status 
as required by Sec. 273.2(f) is not provided on a timely basis, the 
eligibility of the remaining household members shall be determined. The 
income and resources of the individual whose alien status is unverified 
shall be handled as outlined in Sec. 273.11(c) and considered available 
in determining the eligibility of the remaining household members. If 
verification of eligible alien status is subsequently received, the 
State agency shall act on the information as a reported change in 
household membership in accordance with timeliness standards in 
Sec. 273.12.
    (e) Reporting illegal aliens. (1) The State agency shall immediately 
inform the local INS office whenever personnel responsible for the 
certification or recertification of households determine that any member 
of a household is ineligible to receive food stamps because the member 
is present in the United States in violation of the Immigration and 
Nationality Act.
    (2) When a household indicates inability or unwillingness to provide 
documentation of alien status for any household member, that member 
should be classified as an ineligible alien. When a person indicates 
inability or unwillingness to provide documentation of alien status, 
that person should be classified as an ineligible alien. In such cases 
the State agency

[[Page 583]]

shall not continue efforts to obtain that documentation.

[Amdt. 189, 47 FR 17763, Apr. 23, 1982, as amended by Amdt. 269, 51 FR 
10785, Mar. 28, 1986; 52 FR 20058, May 29, 1987; 52 FR 22888, June 16, 
1987; 53 FR 6558, Mar. 2, 1988; 56 FR 63596, Dec. 4, 1991; Amdt. 364, 61 
FR 54317, Oct. 17, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 273.5  Students.

    (a) Applicability. An individual who is enrolled at least half-time 
in an institution of higher education shall be ineligible to participate 
in the Food Stamp Program unless the individual qualifies for one of the 
exemptions contained in paragraph (b) of this section. An individual is 
considered to be enrolled in an institution of higher education if the 
individual is enrolled in a business, technical, trade, or vocational 
school that normally requires a high school diploma or equivalency 
certificate for enrollment in the curriculum or if the individual is 
enrolled in a regular curriculum at a college or university that offers 
degree programs regardless of whether a high school diploma is required.
    (b) Student Exemptions. To be eligible for the program, a student as 
defined in paragraph (a) of the section must meet at least one of the 
following criteria.
    (1) Be age 17 or younger or age 50 or older;
    (2) Be physically or mentally unfit;
    (3) Be receiving Aid to Families with Dependent Children under Title 
IV of the Social Security Act;
    (4) Be enrolled as a result of participation in the Job 
Opportunities and Basic Skills program under Title IV of the Social 
Security Act or its successor program;
    (5) Be employed for a minimum of 20 hours per week and be paid for 
such employment or, if self-employed, be employed for a minimum of 20 
hours per week and receiving weekly earnings at least equal to the 
Federal minimum wage multiplied by 20 hours;
    (6) Be participating in a State or federally financed work study 
program during the regular school year.
    (i) To qualify under this provision, the student must be approved 
for work study at the time of application for food stamps, the work 
study must be approved for the school term, and the student must 
anticipate actually working during that time. The exemption shall begin 
with the month in which the school term begins or the month work study 
is approved, whichever is later. Once begun, the exemption shall 
continue until the end of the month in which the school term ends, or it 
becomes known that the student has refused an assignment.
    (ii) The exemption shall not continue between terms when there is a 
break of a full month or longer unless the student is participating in 
work study during the break.
    (7) Be participating in an on-the-job training program. A person is 
considered to be participating in an on-the-job training program only 
during the period of time the person is being trained by the employer;
    (8) Be responsible for the care of a dependent household member 
under the age of 6;
    (9) Be responsible for the care of a dependent household member who 
has reached the age of 6 but is under age 12 when the State agency has 
determined that adequate child care is not available to enable the 
student to attend class and comply with the work requirements of 
paragraph (b)(5) or (b)(6) of this section;
    (10) Be a single parent enrolled in an institution of higher 
education on a full-time basis (as determined by the institution) and be 
responsible for the care of a dependent child under age 12.
    (i) This provision applies in those situations where only one 
natural, adoptive or stepparent (regardless of marital status) is in the 
same food stamp household as the child.
    (ii) If no natural, adoptive or stepparent is in the same food stamp 
household as the child, another full-time student in the same food stamp 
household as the child may qualify for eligible student status under 
this provision if he or she has parental control over the child and is 
not living with his or her spouse.
    (11) Be assigned to or placed in an institution of higher education 
through or in compliance with the requirements of one of the programs 
identified in paragraphs (b)(11)(i) through (b)(11)(iv) of this section. 
Self-initiated placements during the period of time the

[[Page 584]]

person is enrolled in one of these employment and training programs 
shall be considered to be in compliance with the requirements of the 
employment and training program in which the person is enrolled provided 
that the program has a component for enrollment in an institution of 
higher education and that program accepts the placement. Persons who 
voluntarily participate in one of these employment and training programs 
and are placed in an institution of higher education through or in 
compliance with the requirements of the program shall also qualify for 
the exemption. The programs are:
    (i) a program under the Job Training Partnership Act of 1974 (29 
U.S.C. 1501, et seq.);
    (ii) an employment and training program under Sec. 273.7;
    (iii) a program under section 236 of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 
U.S.C. 2296); or
    (iv) an employment and training program for low-income households 
that is operated by a State or local government where one or more of the 
components of such program is at least equivalent to an acceptable food 
stamp employment and training program component as specified in 
Sec. 273.7(f)(1). Using the criteria in Sec. 273.7(f)(1), State agencies 
shall make the determinations as to whether or not the programs qualify.
    (c) The enrollment status of a student shall begin on the first day 
of the school term of the institution of higher education. Such 
enrollment shall be deemed to continue through normal periods of class 
attendance, vacation and recess, unless the student graduates, is 
suspended or expelled, drops out, or does not intend to register for the 
next normal school term (excluding summer school).
    (d) The income and resources of an ineligible student shall be 
handled as outlined in Sec. 273.11(d).

[46 FR 43025, Aug. 25, 1981, as amended by Amdt. 235, 47 FR 55908, Dec. 
14, 1982; Amdt. 269, 51 FR 10785, Mar. 28, 1986; Amdt. 274, 51 FR 18750, 
May 21, 1986; Amdt. 277, 51 FR 30048, Aug. 22, 1986; Amdt. 370, 60 FR 
48869, Sept. 21, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 273.6  Social security numbers.

    (a) Requirements for participation. The State agency shall require 
that a household participating or applying for participation in the Food 
Stamp Program provide the State agency with the social security number 
(SSN) of each household member or apply for one before certification. If 
individuals have more than one number, all numbers shall be required. 
The State agency shall explain to applicants and participants that 
refusal or failure without good cause to provide an SSN will result in 
disqualification of the individual for whom an SSN is not obtained.
    (b) Obtaining SSNs for food stamp household members. (1) For those 
individuals who provide SSNs prior to certification, recertification or 
at any office contact, the State agency shall record the SSN and verify 
it in accordance with Sec. 273.2(f)(1)(v).
    (2) For those individuals who do not have an SSN, the State agency 
shall:
    (i) If an enumeration agreement with SSA exists, complete the 
application for an SSN, Form SS-5. To complete Form SS-5, the State 
agency must document the verification of identity, age, and citizenship 
or alien status as required by SSA and forward the SS-5 to SSA.
    (ii) If no enumeration agreement exists, an individual must apply at 
the SSA, and the State agency shall arrange with SSA to be notified 
directly of the SSN when it is issued. The State agency shall inform the 
household where to apply and what information will be needed, including 
any which may be needed for SSA to notify the State agency of the SSN. 
The State agency shall advise the household member that proof of 
application from SSA will be required prior to certification. SSA 
normally uses the Receipt of Application for a Social Security Number, 
Form SSA-5028, as evidence that an individual has applied for an SSN. 
State agencies may also use their own documents for this purpose.
    (3) The State agency shall follow the procedures described in 
paragraphs (b)(2) (i) and (ii) of this section for individuals who do 
not know if they have an SSN, or are unable to find their SSN.
    (4) If the household is unable to provide proof of application for 
an SSN for a newborn, the household must provide

[[Page 585]]

the SSN or proof of application at its next recertification or within 6 
months following the month the baby is born, whichever is later. If the 
household is unable to provide an SSN or proof of application for an SSN 
at its next recertification within 6 months following the baby's birth, 
the State agency shall determine if the good cause provisions of 
paragraph (d) of this section are applicable.
    (c) Failure to comply. If the State agency determines that a 
household member has refused or failed without good cause to provide or 
apply for an SSN, then that individual shall be ineligible to 
participate in the Food Stamp Program. The disqualification applies to 
the individual for whom the SSN is not provided and not to the entire 
household. The earned or unearned income and resources of an individual 
disqualified from the household for failure to comply with this 
requirement shall be counted as household income and resources to the 
extent specified in Sec. 273.11(c) of these regulations.
    (d) Determining good cause. In determining if good cause exists for 
failure to comply with the requirement to apply for or provide the State 
agency with an SSN, the State agency shall consider information from the 
household member, SSA and the State agency (especially if the State 
agency was designated to send the SS-5 to SSA and either did not process 
the SS-5 or did not process it in a timely manner). Documentary evidence 
or collateral information that the household member has applied for an 
SSN or made every effort to supply SSA with the necessary information to 
complete an application for an SSN shall be considered good cause for 
not complying timely with this requirement. Good cause does not include 
delays due to illness, lack of transportation or temporary absences, 
because SSA makes provisions for mail-in applications in lieu of 
applying in person. If the household member can show good cause why an 
application for a SSN has not been completed in a timely manner, that 
person shall be allowed to participate for one month in addition to the 
month of application. If the household member applying for an SSN has 
been unable to obtain the documents required by SSN, the State agency 
caseworker should make every effort to assist the individual in 
obtaining these documents. Good cause for failure to apply must be shown 
monthly in order for such a household member to continue to participate. 
Once an application has been filed, the State agency shall permit the 
member to continue to participate pending notification of the State 
agency of the household member's SSN.
    (e) Ending disqualification. The household member(s) disqualified 
may become eligible upon providing the State agency with an SSN.
    (f) Use of SSNs. The State agency is authorized to use SSNs in the 
administration of the Food Stamp Program. To the extent determined 
necessary by the Secretary and the Secretary of Health and Human 
Services, State agencies shall have access to information regarding 
individual Food Stamp Program applicants and participants who receive 
benefits under title XVI of the Social Security Act to determine such a 
household's eligibility to receive assistance and the amount of 
assistance, or to verify information related to the benefit of these 
households. State agencies shall use the State Data Exchange (SDX) to 
the maximum extent possible. The State agency should also use the SSNs 
to prevent duplicate participation, to facilitate mass changes in 
Federal benefits as described in Sec. 273.12(e)(3) and to determine the 
accuracy and/or reliability of information given by households. In 
particular, SSNs shall be used by the State agency to request and 
exchange information on individuals through the IEVS as specified in 
Sec. 272.8.
    (g) Entry of SSNs into automated data bases. State agencies with 
automated food stamp data bases containing household information shall 
enter all SSNs obtained in accordance with Sec. 273.6(a) into these 
files.

[Amdt. 264, 51 FR 7206, Feb. 28, 1986; Amdt. 364, 61 FR 54317, Oct. 17, 
1996]


<R05>
Sec. 273.7  Work requirements.

    (a) Persons required to register. Each household member who is not 
exempt by paragraph (b)(1) of this section shall be registered for 
employment by the

[[Page 586]]

State agency at the time of application, and once every twelve months 
after initial registration, as a condition of eligibility. The 
registration form need not be completed by the member required to 
register.
    (b) Exemptions from work registration. (1) The following persons are 
exempt from the work registration requirement:
    (i) A person younger than 16 years of age or a person 60 years of 
age or older. If a child has its 16th birthday within a certification 
period, the child shall fulfill the work registration requirement as 
part of the next scheduled recertification process, unless the child 
qualifies for another exemption. A person age sixteen or seventeen who 
is not a head of a household or who is attending school, or enrolled in 
an employment training program on at least a half-time-basis is exempt.
    (ii) A person physically or mentally unfit for employment. If mental 
or physical unfitness is claimed and the unfitness is not evident to the 
State agency, verification may be required. Appropriate verification may 
consist of receipt of temporary or permanent disability benefits issued 
by governmental or private sources, or of a statement from a physician 
or licensed or certified psychologist.
    (iii) A household member subject to and complying with any work 
requirement under title IV of the Social Security Act, including WIN 
registration. If the exemption claimed is questionable, the State agency 
shall be responsible for verifying the exemption.
    (iv) A parent or other household member who is responsible for the 
care of a dependent child under 6 or an incapacitated person. If the 
child has its 6th birthday within a certification period, the individual 
responsible for the care of the child shall fulfill the work 
registration requirement as part of the next scheduled recertification 
process, unless the individual qualifies for another exemption.
    (v) A person is in receipt of unemployment compensation. A person 
who has applied for, but has not yet begun to receive, unemployment 
compensation shall also be exempt if that person was required to 
register for work with the SESA as part of the unemployment compensation 
application process. If the exemption claimed is questionable, the State 
agency shall be responsible for verifying the exemption with the 
appropriate office of the SESA.
    (vi) A regular participant in a drug addiction or alcoholic 
treatment and rehabilitation program.
    (vii) A person who is employed or self-employed and working a 
minimum of 30 hours weekly or receiving weekly earnings at least equal 
to the Federal minimum wage multiplied by 30 hours. This shall include 
migrant and seasonal farmworkers who are under contract or similar 
agreement with an employer or crew chief to begin employment within 30 
days (although this shall not prevent individuals from seeking 
additional services from SESA). For work registration purposes, a person 
residing in certain designated areas of Alaska, as specified in 
Sec. 274.10(a)(4)(iii), who subsistence hunts and/or fishes a minimum of 
30 hours weekly as determined by averaging such activity over the 
certification period shall be considered exempt as self-employed.
    (viii) A student enrolled at least half time in any recognized 
school, training program, or institution of higher education; provided 
that students enrolled at least half time in an institution of higher 
education have met the eligibility conditions in Sec. 273.5 of this 
part. A student enrolled in a school, training program or institution of 
higher education shall remain exempt during normal periods of class 
attendance, vacation and recess, unless the student graduates, is 
suspended or expelled, drops out, or does not intend to register for the 
next normal school term (excluding summer). Persons who are not enrolled 
at least half time or who experience a break in enrollment status due to 
graduation, expulsion, or suspension, or who drop out or otherwise do 
not intend to return to school, shall not be considered students for the 
purpose of qualifying for this exemption.
    (2)(i) Persons losing exemption status due to any changes in 
circumstances that are subject to the reporting requirements of 
Sec. 273.12 (such as loss of employment that also results in a loss of 
income of more than $25 a month, or

[[Page 587]]

departure from the household of the sole dependent child for whom an 
otherwise nonexempt household member was caring) shall register for 
employment when the change is reported. If the State agency does not use 
a work registration form, it shall annotate the change to the member's 
exemption status. If a work registration form is used, the State agency 
shall be responsible for providing the participant with a work 
registration form when the change is reported. Participants shall be 
responsible for returning the form to the State agency within 10 
calendar days from the date the form was handed to the household member 
reporting the change in person, or the date the State agency mailed the 
form. If the participant fails to return the form, the State agency 
shall issue a notice of adverse action stating that the participant or, 
if the individual is the head of household, the household is being 
terminated and why, but that the termination can be avoided by returning 
the form.
    (ii) Those persons who lose their exemption due to a change in 
circumstances that is not subject to the reporting requirements of 
Sec. 273.12 shall register for employment at their household's next 
recertification.
    (c) State agency responsibilities. (1) The State shall register for 
work each household member not exempted by the provisions of 
Sec. 273.7(b). Upon reaching a determination that an applicant or a 
member of the applicant's household is required to register, the State 
agency shall explain to the applicant the pertinent work requirements, 
the rights and responsibilities of work registered household members, 
and the consequences of failure to comply. The State agency shall 
provide a written statement of the above to each work registrant in the 
household. A notice shall also be provided when a previously exempt 
member or new household member becomes subject to a work requirement, 
and at recertification. The State agency shall permit the applicant to 
complete a record or form for each household member required to register 
for employment in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section. 
Household members are considered to have registered when an identifiable 
work registration form is submitted to the State agency or when the 
registration is otherwise annotated or recorded by the State.
    (2) The State agency shall be responsible for screening each work 
registrant to determine whether or not it is appropriate, based on the 
State's criteria, to refer the individual to an employment and training 
program, and if appropriate, referring the individual to an employment 
and training program component. Upon entry into each component the 
registrant applicant or volunteer, should be told, either orally or in 
writing, the requirements of the component, what will constitute 
noncompliance and the sanctions for noncompliance. The State agency 
shall initiate conciliation procedures, pursuant to paragraph (g)(1)(ii) 
of this section, upon determining that an individual has not complied 
with E&T requirements. The State agency shall issue a notice of adverse 
action (Form FCS-441 or equivalent State-designed form) to the 
individual or household, as appropriate, no later than the last day of 
the conciliation period. If the notice of adverse action was issued 
prior to the end of the conciliation period and the State agency 
verifies that compliance was achieved by the end of the conciliation 
period, the notice of adverse action may be cancelled. If States wish to 
use different intake and sanction systems which are compatible with 
title IV-A work programs such systems shall be proposed in the State 
agency's plan, and subject to the Secretary's approval.
    (3) The State agency shall design and operate an employment and 
training program which may consist of one or more or a combination of 
employment and/or training components as described in Sec. 273.7(f). The 
State agency must ensure that it is notified by the agency or agencies 
operating its E&T components within ten days if an E&T mandatory 
participant fails to comply with E&T requirements.
    (4) In accordance with 7 CFR 272.2(e)(9), each State agency must 
prepare and submit an Employment and Training plan to its appropriate 
FCS Regional Office and to the FCS National Office. The plan shall be 
available for public inspection at the State

[[Page 588]]

agency headquarters. In its plan, the State shall detail the following:
    (i) The nature of the employment and training components the State 
plans to offer and the reasons for such components, including cost 
information. The methodology for State reimbursement for education 
components shall be specifically addressed;
    (ii) An operating budget for the Federal fiscal year with an 
estimate of the cost of operation for one full year. Any State which 
will request 50 percent federal reimbursement for State E & T 
administrative costs, other than for participant reimbursements, shall 
include in its plan, or amendments to its plan, an itemized list of all 
activities and costs for which those Federal funds will be claimed. 
Costs in excess of the federal grant shall be allowed only with the 
prior approval of the Department and must be adequately documented to 
assure that they are necessary, reasonable and properly allocated;
    (iii) The categories and types of individuals the State seeks to 
exempt from E&T participation, the basis used to determine these 
exemptions, including any cost information and the estimated percentage 
of work registrants the State plans to exempt;
    (iv) The characteristics of the population the State does intend to 
place;
    (v) The estimated number of volunteers the State expects to place in 
its employment and training program;
    (vi) The geographic areas covered and not covered by the plan and 
why, and the type and location of services to be offered;
    (vii) The method the State will use to count all work registrants 
the first month of each fiscal year;
    (viii) The method the State agency uses to report work registrant 
information and prevent work registrants from being reported twice 
within a Federal fiscal year on the quarterly FCS Form 583. This method 
must specify how work registrants are excluded if the State agency work 
register all food stamp applicants (i.e., universal work registration) 
when the applicants are exempt from work registration as specified under 
paragraph (b) of this section or if the State agency work registers 
nonexempt participants whenever a new application is submitted and the 
participants may have already been registered within the past twelve 
months as specified under paragraph (a) of this section. If the method 
the State agency uses is questionable or unacceptable, FCS reserves the 
right to adjust a State agency's work registrant count. FCS shall advise 
a State agency of how the adjusted figure was determined and shall allow 
the State agency 30 days to submit another method for consideration by 
FCS.
    (ix) If a State plans to offer components which are significantly 
more intensive than the minimum level of effort specified in 
Sec. 273.7(f), or plans to concentrate its efforts on persons who may be 
difficult to place, due to employment obstacles, it shall be made clear 
in the State's employment and training plan. If, because of the nature 
of its components, or the population served, a State believes that an 
adjustment to the performance standard established in Sec. 273.7(o) is 
appropriate, and wishes to request a revision in the standard, it shall 
specify the percentage of its work registered population it intends to 
serve, and provide the Department with detailed information about why it 
has chosen to operate such a component or components, or chosen to focus 
on certain persons, the intended benefits to be gained by the recipient 
and Federal and State governments, and the number of persons it plans to 
serve in the component. The information provided to the Department will 
be used in determining whether the State's performance standard will be 
affected;
    (x) The organizational relationship between the units responsible 
for certification and the units operating the employment and training 
components. FCS is specifically concerned that the lines of 
communication be efficient and that noncompliance be reported to the 
certification unit within ten working days after such noncompliance is 
determined;
    (xi) The relationship between the State agency and other 
organizations it plans to coordinate with for the provision of services. 
Copies of contracts shall be available for inspection;

[[Page 589]]

    (xii) The availability, if appropriate, of employment and training 
programs to Indians living on reservations.
    (xiii) Beginning with the Fiscal Year 1992 State E&T plan, the 
procedures developed by the State agency under paragraph (g)(1)(ii) of 
this section for conciliation. To the extent possible, State agencies 
should design conciliation procedures for the E&T program that will be 
compatible with the conciliation process that State agencies that 
administer the Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) Program 
will establish for the Job Opportunities and Basic Skills Training 
(JOBS) Program as mandated by the Family Support Act of 1988.
    (xiv) The Statewide limit(s) for dependent care reimbursements as 
established by the State agency. The limit(s) shall not be less than the 
dependent care deduction amounts specified under Sec. 273.9(d)(4).
    (xv) The local market rates of dependent care providers in the 
State. State agencies shall adopt the local market rates already 
established by programs under section 402(g) of the Social Security Act. 
State agencies shall establish separate local market rates for 
categories of care relevant to food stamp E&T which are not addressed 
under section 402(g) of the Social Security Act and include such rates 
in the E&T State Plan.
    (5) Plans shall be submitted biennially, 45 days before the start of 
the fiscal year, beginning in FY 1990. States must submit plan revisions 
to the appropriate FCS regional office for approval if they plan to 
alter the nature or location of their components or the number or 
characteristics of persons served. The proposed changes shall be 
submitted for approval at least 30 days prior to planned implementation.
    (6) The State shall submit quarterly reports to FCS no later than 45 
days after the end of each Federal fiscal quarter containing monthly 
figures for the number of:
    (i) Participants newly work registered;
    (ii) Work registrants exempted by the State from participation in an 
employment and training program;
    (iii) Participants who volunteer for and commence participation in 
an approved E&T component;
    (iv) E&T mandatory participants who commence an approved E&T 
component including Food Stamp Program applicants in States which 
operate a component for applicants;
    (v) Work registrants sent a Notice of Adverse Action for failure to 
comply with E&T requirements, and the number of applicants who were 
denied food stamp certification or recertification for failure to comply 
with an E&T component.
    (7) States shall submit annually, on their first quarterly report 
the number of work registered persons in that State as in October of the 
new fiscal year.
    (8) States shall submit annually, on their final quarterly report 
the following information:
    (i) The number of Food Stamp Program work registrants who were 
exempted as part of a category of persons during the course of the year 
separated by the specific reasons for the exemptions.
    (ii) The number of food stamp participants (E&T mandatory and 
volunteers) placed in each E&T component offered by the State agency.
    (9) Additional information may be required of individual State 
agencies on an as needed basis depending on the contents of the State's 
plan regarding the type of components offered and the characteristics of 
persons served.
    (10) States must ensure, to the maximum extent practicable, that 
employment and training programs are provided for Indians living on 
reservations.
    (11) If a benefit overissuance is discovered for a month or months 
in which a mandatory E & T participant has already fulfilled a work 
component requirement, the State agency shall follow the procedure 
specified in Sec. 273.22(f)(9) for a workfare overissuance.
    (d) Federal financial participation--(1) Employment and training 
grants. (i) State agencies shall receive an employment and training 
program grant for each fiscal year or portion of the fiscal

[[Page 590]]

year in which they operate an employment and training program. The grant 
shall require no State matching.
    (A) Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (d)(1)(i)(D) of this 
section, effective in FY 1992, the nonperformance based Federal funding 
for employment and training grants shall be allocated on the basis of 
work registrants in each State agency as a percentage of work 
registrants nationwide. FCS will use work registrant data from the most 
recent Federal fiscal year. In FY 1992, each State agency shall receive 
an increase or decrease that is one-half of the difference between:
    (1) An amount that is based on the percent of each State agency's 
caseload in FY 1990 as compared to the average monthly caseload 
nationwide; and
    (2) An amount that is based on the percent of each State agency's 
work registrant population in FY 1990 as compared to number of work 
registrants nationwide.
    (B) Effective in FY 1992, no State agency shall receive less tha 
$50,000 in nonperformance based Federal E&T funds. To ensure that no 
State agency receives less than $50,000 in FY 192, each State agency 
that is allocated more than $50,000 and would receive an increase in its 
E&T grant shall have its grant reduced if necessary. The reduction shall 
be proportionate to the number of work registrants in each State 
receiving more than $50,000 and receiving an increase in its E&T grant 
as compared to the total number of work registrants in all the States 
receiving more than $50,000 coupled with increases in their E&T grants. 
To insure that no State agency receives less than $50,000 as of FY 1993, 
each State agency that is allocated to receive more than $50,000 shall 
have its grant reduced, if necessary, proportionate to the number of 
work registrants in each State as compared to the total number of work 
registrants in all the State agencies receiving more than $50,000. The 
funds from the reduction shall be distributed to State agencies 
initially allocated to receive less than $50,000.
    (C) In Federal fiscal year 1993, the Secretary shall allocate $15 
million of the Federal funds available for unmatched employment and 
training grants based on the ratio of the number of E&T mandatory 
participants placed (as defined under paragraph (o) of this section) in 
a food stamp E&T program in an eligible State to the number of E&T 
mandatory participants placed in all eligible States in Calendar Year 
1991. Beginning in Federal fiscal year 1994, and each subsequent Federal 
fiscal year until FY 1998, the Secretary shall allocate $15 million of 
Federal funds on the basis of the amount of performance-based funding 
each State agency received in Federal fiscal year 1993, provided the 
State agency has met the performance standard (as defined under 
paragraph (o) of this section) for the second preceding Federal fiscal 
year. For example, to receive performance-based funding in Federal 
fiscal year 1996, the State agency must have met its performance 
standard in Federal fiscal year 1994. Corrections to reports required to 
be submitted in accordance with paragraph (c) of this section must be 
received by FCS, and State agency good cause appeals must be resolved no 
later than March 1, to be used in determining whether a State agency is 
eligible for performance-based funding for the Federal fiscal year 
beginning the following October. If the data on the reports show that a 
State agency did not meet its performance standard or a good cause 
determination was not made by FCS by March 1, the State agency shall not 
be eligible for performance-based funding. In this instance, the 
Secretary shall redistribute the $15 million Federal funds to eligible 
State agencies on the basis of Calendar Year 1991 data as prescribed 
under this paragraph, excluding the noncompliant States.
    (D) The Secretary may adjust the level of grants during a fiscal 
year to take into account substantial amounts of funds for employment 
and training programs which are unlikely to be used by a State agency 
during the fiscal year and which could be productively used by another 
State agency or agencies, with concurrence of the State agencies 
involved.
    (E) State agencies shall use employment and training program grants 
to

[[Page 591]]

fund the administrative costs of planning, implementing and operating 
employment and training programs in accordance with approved State 
agency plans. Employment and training grants shall not be used for the 
process of determining whether a participant shall be work registered, 
the work registration process, or any further screening performed during 
the certification process, nor for sanction activity which takes place 
after the operator of an employment and training component has reported 
noncompliance without good cause. For purposes of this paragraph, the 
certification process shall be considered to have ended when an 
individual is referred to an employment and training component for 
assessment or participation. Employment and training grants shall also 
not be used to subsidize the wages of participants, or to reimburse 
participants under paragraph (d)(1)(ii) of this section.
    (F) A State's receipt of the employment and training program grant 
as allocated under paragraph (d)(1)(i) (A) or (B) of this section is 
contingent on the Secretary's approval of the State's employment and 
training plan. If an adequate plan is not submitted, the Secretary may 
reallocate a State's grant among other States with approved plans. Non-
receipt of an employment and training program grant does not release a 
State from performance requirements under paragraph (o) of this section 
or sanctions for insufficient performance.
    (G) Federal funds made available to a State agency under this 
section to operate a component under paragraph (f)(1)(vi) of this 
section shall not be used to supplant nonfederal funds for existing 
educational services and activities that promote the purposes of this 
component. Education expenses are approvable to the extent that 
employment and training component costs exceed the normal cost of 
services provided to persons not participating in an employment and 
training program.
    (ii) Participant reimbursements. The State agency shall provide 
payments to participants in its E&T program, including applicants 
required to perform job search and volunteers, for expenses that are 
reasonably necessary and directly related to participation in the E&T 
program. These payments may be provided as a reimbursement for expenses 
incurred or in advance as payment for anticipated expenses in the coming 
month. The State agency shall inform each E&T participant that allowable 
expenses up to the amounts specified in paragraphs (d)(1)(ii)(A) and 
(d)(1)(ii)(B) of this section will be reimbursed by the State agency 
upon presentation of appropriate documentation. Reimbursable costs may 
include, but are not limited to, dependent care costs, transportation, 
and other work, training or education related expenses such as uniforms, 
personal safety items or other necessary equipment, and books or 
training manuals. These costs shall not include the cost of meals away 
from home. Any allowable costs incurred by a noncompliant E&T 
participant that are reasonably necessary and directly related to 
participation in the conciliation process shall be reimbursable under 
paragraphs (d)(1)(ii)(A) and (d)(1)(ii)(B) of this section. The State 
agency may reimburse participants for expenses beyond the amounts 
specified in paragraphs (d)(1)(ii)(A) and (d)(1)(ii)(B) of this section, 
however, only costs which are up to but not in excess of those amounts 
shall be subject to Federal cost sharing. Reimbursement shall not be 
provided from E&T grants provided under paragraph (d)(1)(i) of this 
section. Any expense covered by a reimbursement under this section shall 
not be deductible under Sec. 273.10(d)(1)(i). Reimbursements shall be 
provided as follows:
    (A) The costs of such dependent care expenses that are determined by 
the State agency to be necessary for the participation of a household 
member in the E&T program up to the actual cost of dependent care, the 
local market rate, or the Statewide limit, whichever is lowest. A 
dependent care reimbursement shall be provided to an E&T participant for 
all dependents requiring dependent care unless otherwise prohibited by 
this section. A reimbursement shall not be provided for a dependent age 
13 or older unless the dependent is physically and/or mentally

[[Page 592]]

incapable of caring for himself or herself or under court supervision. A 
reimbursement shall be provided for all dependents who are physically 
and/or mentally incapable of caring for themselves or who are under 
court supervision, regardless of age, if dependent care is necessary for 
the participation of a household member in the E&T program. Verification 
of the physical and/or mental incapacity is questionable. Also, 
verification of a court imposed requirement for the supervision of a 
dependent age 13 or older is necessary if the need for dependent care is 
questionable. If more than one household member is required to 
participate in the E&T program, the State agency shall provide 
reimbursement for the actual cost of dependent care, the local market 
rate, or the Statewide limit, whichever is lowest, for each dependent in 
the household, regardless of the number of household members 
participating in the E&T program. An individual who is the caretaker 
relative of a dependent in a family receiving benefits under the AFDC 
program in a local area where an employment, training, or education 
program under the AFDC program is in operation, or was in operation on 
September 19, 1988, is not eligible for such reimbursement. An E&T 
participant is not entitled to the dependent care reimbursement if a 
member of the E&T participant's food stamp household provides the 
dependent care services. The State agency must verify the participant's 
need for dependent care and the cost of the dependent care prior to the 
issuance of the reimbursement. The verification must include the name 
and address of the dependent care provider, the cost and the hours of 
service, e.g., five hours per day, five days per week for two weeks. A 
participant may not be reimbursed for dependent care services beyond 
that which is required for participation in the E&T program. In lieu of 
providing reimbursements for dependent care expenses, a State agency may 
arrange for dependent care through providers by the use of purchase of 
service contracts, by providing vouchers to the household or by other 
means. A State agency may require that dependent care provided or 
arranged by the State agency meet all applicable standards of State and 
local law, including requirements designed to ensure basic health and 
safety protections, e.g., fire safety. An E&T participant may refuse 
available appropriate dependent care as provided or arranged by the 
State agency, if the participant can arrange other dependent care or can 
show that such refusal will not prevent or interfere with participation 
in the E&T program as required by the State agency. A State agency may 
claim 50 percent of costs for dependent care services provided or 
arranged by the State agency up to the actual cost of dependent care, 
the local market rate, or the Statewide limit, whichever is lowest.
    (B) The actual costs of transportation and other costs (excluding 
dependent care costs) that are determined by the State agency to be 
necessary and directly related to participation in the E&T program up to 
$25 per participant per month. Such costs shall be the actual costs of 
participation unless the State agency has a method approved in its State 
E&T plan for providing allowances to participants to reflect approximate 
costs of participation. If a State agency has an approved method to 
provide allowances rather than reimbursements, it must provide 
participants an opportunity to claim actual expenses which exceed the 
standard, up to $25 or such other maximum level of reimbursements which 
is established by the State agency.
    (C) No participant cost which has been reimbursed under a workfare 
program under Sec. 273.22, title IV of the Social Security Act or other 
work program shall be reimbursed under this section.
    (D) Any portion of dependent care costs which are reimbursed under 
this section may not be claimed as an expense and used in calculating 
the dependent care deduction under Sec. 273.9(d)(4) for determining 
benefits.
    (E) The State agency shall inform all mandatory E&T participants 
that they may be exempted from E&T participation if their monthly 
expenses that are

[[Page 593]]

reasonably necessary and directly related to participation in the E&T 
program exceed the allowable reimbursement amount. Persons for whom 
allowable monthly expenses in an E&T component exceed the amounts 
specified under paragraphs (d)(1)(ii)(A) and (d)(1)(ii)(B) of this 
section shall not be required to participate in that component. These 
individuals shall be placed, if possible, in another suitable component 
in which the individual's monthly E&T expenses would not exceed the 
allowable reimbursable amount paid by the State agency. If a suitable 
component is not available, these individuals shall be exempted from E&T 
participation until a suitable component is available or the 
individual's circumstances change and his/her monthly expenses do not 
exceed the allowable reimbursable amount paid by the State agency. 
Individuals exempted because their monthly expenses exceed the allowable 
reimbursable amounts specified under paragraphs (d)(1)(ii)(A) and 
(d)(1)(ii)(B) of this section may volunteer to participate in the E&T 
program. Volunteers must be informed that their allowable expenses in 
excess of the reimbursable amounts will not be reimbursed. Dependent 
care expenses incurred that are otherwise allowable but not reimbursed 
because they exceed the reimbursable amount specified under paragraph 
(d)(1)(ii)(B) shall be considered in determining a dependent care 
deduction under 7 CFR 273.9(d)(4).
    (iii) Fifty percent of all other administrative costs incurred by 
State agencies in operating employment and training programs, above the 
costs referenced in paragraphs (d)(1)(i) of this section, shall be 
funded by the Federal government.
    (iv) Enhanced cost-sharing due to placement of workfare participants 
in paid employment is available only for workfare programs funded under 
Sec. 273.22(g) at the 50 percent reimbursement level and reported as 
such.
    (2) Funding mechanism. Employment and training program funding will 
be disbursed through States' Letters of Credit in accordance with 
Sec. 277.5 of the regulations. The State agency shall ensure that 
records are maintained which support the financial claims being made to 
FCS.
    (3) Fiscal recordkeeping and reporting requirements. Total 
employment and training expenditures shall be reported on the Financial 
Status Report (SF-269) in the column containing ``other'' expenses. 
Employment and training expenditures shall also be separately identified 
in an attachment to the SF-269 to show, as provided in instructions, 
total State and Federal employment and training expenditures; 
expenditures funded with the unmatched Federal grants; State and Federal 
expenditures for participant reimbursements; State and Federal 
expenditures for employment and training costs at the 50 percent 
reimbursement level; and State and Federal expenditures for optional 
workfare program costs, operated under section 20 of the Food Stamp Act 
and Sec. 273.22 of the regulations. Claims for enhanced funding for 
placements of participants in employment after their initial 
participation in the optional workfare program shall be submitted in 
accordance with Sec. 273.22.
    (e) Work registrant requirements. Work registrants shall:
    (1) Participate in an employment and training program if assigned by 
the State agency;
    (2) Respond to a request from the State agency or its designee for 
supplemental information regarding employment status or availability for 
work;
    (3) Report to an employer to whom referred by the State agency or 
its designee if the potential employment meets the suitability 
requirements described in paragraph (i) of this section;
    (4) Accept a bona fide offer of suitable employment at a wage not 
less than the higher of either the applicable State or Federal minimum 
wage;
    (f) Employment and training programs. Persons required to register 
for work and not exempted by the State agency from placement in an 
employment and training program shall be subject to the requirements 
imposed by the State agency for that individual. Such individuals are 
referred to in this section as E&T mandatory participants. Requirements 
may vary among participants. Failure to comply without good cause with 
the requirements imposed

[[Page 594]]

by the State agency shall result in disqualification as specified in 
Sec. 273.7(g).
    (1) Components. To be considered acceptable by FCS, any component 
offered by a State agency shall entail certain levels of effort by the 
participants. The level of effort should be comparable to spending 
approximately 12 hours a month for two months (or less in workfare or 
work experience components if the household's benefit divided by the 
minimum wage is less than this amount) making job contacts; however, FCS 
may approve components which do not meet this guideline which it 
determines will advance program goals. An initial screening by an 
eligibility worker to determine whom to place in an employment and 
training program does not constitute a component. An employment and 
training program offered by a State agency must offer one or more of the 
following components:
    (i) A job search program comparable to that required for the AFDC 
program under Part A of title IV of the Social Security Act. The State 
may require that an individual participate in a job search program from 
the time an application is filed for an initial period of up to eight 
consecutive weeks. Following this initial period (which may extend 
beyond the date when eligibility is determined) the State may require an 
additional job search period, not to exceed eight weeks (or its 
equivalent) in any period of 12 consecutive months. The first such 
period of 12 consecutive months shall begin at any time following the 
close of the initial period. States must not impose requirements which 
would delay the determination of an individual's eligibility for aid or 
in issuing benefits to any household which is otherwise eligible.
    (ii) A job search training program that includes reasonable job 
search training and support activities. Such a program may consist of 
job skills assessments, job finding clubs, training in techniques for 
employability, job placement services, or other direct training or 
support activities, including educational programs determined by the 
State agency to expand the job search abilities or employability of 
those subject to the program. Job search training activities are 
approvable if they directly enhance the employability of the 
participants. A direct link between the job search training activities 
and job-readiness must be established for a component to be approved.
    (iii) A workfare program as described in Sec. 273.22;
    (iv) A program designed to improve the employability of household 
members through actual work experience or training, or both, and to 
enable individuals employed or trained under such programs to move 
promptly into regular public or private employment. Such an employment 
or training experience shall:
    (A) Limit employment experience assignments to projects that serve a 
useful public purpose in fields such as health, social services, 
environmental protection, urban and rural development, welfare, 
recreation, public facilities, public safety, and day care;
    (B) To the extent possible, use the prior training, experience, and 
skills of the participating member in making appropriate employment or 
training experience assignments;
    (C) Not provide any work that has the effect of replacing the 
employment of an individual not participating in the employment or 
training experience program; and
    (D) Provide the same benefits and working conditions that are 
provided at the job site to employees performing comparable work for 
comparable hours.
    (v) A project, program or experiment such as a supported work 
program, or a JTPA or State or local program aimed at accomplishing the 
purpose of the employment and training program.
    (vi) Educational programs or activities to improve basic skills or 
otherwise improve employability including educational programs 
determined by the State agency to expand the job search abilities or 
employability of those subject to the program as specified under 
paragraph (f) of this section. Allowable educational activities may 
include, but are not limited to, high school or equivalent educational 
programs, remedial education programs to achieve a basic literacy level, 
and instructional programs in English as a second language. Only 
educational components that directly enhance the

[[Page 595]]

employability of the participants are allowable. A direct link between 
the education and job-readiness must be established for a component to 
be approved.
    (vii) A program designed to improve the self-sufficiency of 
recipients through self-employment including programs that provide 
instruction for self-employment ventures.
    (2) Exemptions. Subject to the requirements for overall plan 
approval by the Secretary, State agencies may exempt certain work 
registered individuals and categories of individuals from employment and 
training participation. Individual exemptions shall be evaluated at each 
recertification and exemptions granted to categories of persons should 
be reviewed no less frequently than annually to determine whether they 
remain valid. If a State recognizes that because of changes in its 
caseload the exemption limit set forth in its approved plan is 
insufficient, the State may seek to amend its State plan during the 
year. FCS will consider changes in a State's caseload in determining 
whether a State has complied with its exemption limit.
    (i) Persons who have participated in the Food Stamp Program for 30 
days or less may be exempted from participation.
    (ii) Categories of persons for whom an employment and training 
requirement would be impracticable may be exempted. Factors such as the 
availability of work opportunities and the cost-effectiveness of the 
requirements may be considered. In making the determination of 
exemption, the State agency may designate a category of all households 
residing in a specific area of the State.
    (iii) State agencies may exempt from participation individual 
household members for whom participation is impracticable because of 
personal circumstances such as lack of job readiness, the remote 
location of work opportunities, physical condition, the unavailability 
of dependent care, and monthly E&T expenses that exceed the allowable 
reimbursable amounts specified in paragraphs (d)(1)(ii)(A) and 
(d)(1)(ii)(B) of this section.
    (iv) Persons who are assigned to a job or training component, do not 
commence the component and are determined to have good cause shall be 
considered exempted if the reason for good cause will last for 60 days 
or longer. When the reason for the exemption is no longer applicable, 
the person may be placed in a component.
    (3) Time spent in an employment and training program. (i) The number 
of months a participant spends in an employment and training component 
shall be determined by the State agency with the exception of the 
limitations placed on job search in paragraph (f)(1)(i). The State 
agency may also determine the number of successive components in which a 
participant may be placed.
    (ii) The time spent by the members of a household collectively each 
month in an employment and training work program including, but not 
limited to those carried out under Sec. 273.7(f)(1) (iii) and (iv), 
combined with any hours worked that month in a workfare program under 
Sec. 273.22 shall not exceed the number of hours equal to the 
household's allotment for that month divided by the higher of the 
applicable State or Federal minimum wage. The total hours of 
participation in an E&T component for any household member individually 
in any month, together with any hours worked in a workfare program under 
Sec. 273.22 and any hours worked for compensation (in cash or in kind), 
shall not exceed 120.
    (4) Voluntary participation. (i) A State agency may operate program 
components in which individuals elect to participate.
    (ii) A State agency shall permit, to the extent it deems 
practicable, persons exempt from the work registration or employment and 
training requirements, or those not exempt who have complied or are 
complying with the requirements, to participate in any employment and 
training program it offers.
    (iii) Voluntary participants in an employment and training component 
shall not be disqualified for failure to comply with employment and 
training requirements.
    (iv) The hours of participation or work of a volunteer may not 
exceed the

[[Page 596]]

hours required of E&T mandatory participants, as specified in paragraph 
(f)(3) of this section.
    (5) Priority Service to Volunteers. With prior approval from FCS, 
two State agencies may provide priority service to volunteers through 
September 30, 1995. State agencies that submit an application to provide 
priority service to volunteers have the flexibility to establish 
procedures that deviate from regulations specified under paragraph 
(f)(4) of this section.
    (i) To be eligible for FCS approval, a State agency shall submit an 
application that:
    (A) Describes the volunteer population it intends to serve (e.g., 
number served, volunteer definition, characteristics of the target 
group, percent of volunteer population that are mandatory work 
registrants under normal E&T requirements and percent that are exempt 
from work registration);
    (B) Describes the component activities that will be offered to 
volunteer participants;
    (C) Identifies where the volunteer program will operate (i.e., 
Statewide or selected counties);
    (D) Specifies the duration of the volunteer program;
    (E) Identifies the criteria and research design the State agency 
recommends to evaluate the effectiveness of the program;
    (F) Provides assurances that applicants who are subject to work 
registration as specified under Sec. 273.7 (a) and (b) are required to 
work register as a condition of eligibility;
    (G) Provides assurances that the State agency will meet the 
established performance standards under Sec. 273.7(o); and
    (H) Provides assurances that the evaluation will be conducted by an 
organization separate from the administration of the State agency and 
that ongoing and final result of the evaluation will be provided to FCS.
    (ii) State agencies which receive approval to provide priority 
volunteer service shall:
    (A) Submit a revised E&T plan that incorporates the voluntary 
service provisions;
    (B) Continue to report quarterly (i.e., Form FCS 583) as specified 
under paragraph (c)(6) of this section;
    (C) Meet the performance standards as specified under Sec. 273.7(o); 
and
    (D) Submit data annually which show the number of volunteers who 
fail to complete an assigned E&T activity.
    (g) Failure to comply--(1) Noncompliance with Food Stamp Program 
work regulations. (i) If the State agency determines that an individual 
other than the head of household as defined in Sec. 273.1(d) has refused 
or failed without good cause to comply with the requirements imposed by 
this section and by the State agency, that individual shall be 
ineligible to participate in the Food Stamp Program for two months, as 
provided in this paragraph, and shall be considered an ineligible 
household member, pursuant to Sec. 273.1(b)(2). If the head of household 
fails to comply, the entire household is ineligible to participate as 
provided in this paragraph. Ineligibility in both cases shall continue 
either until the member who caused the violation complies with the 
requirement as specified in paragraph (h) of this section, leaves the 
household, becomes exempt from work registration through paragraph (b) 
of this section, other than through the exemptions of paragraphs 
(b)(1)(iii) or (b)(1)(v), or for two months, whichever occurs earlier. A 
household determined to be ineligible due to failure to comply with the 
provisions of this section may reestablish eligibility if a new and 
eligible person joins the household as its head of household, as defined 
in Sec. 273.1(d)(2). If any household member who failed to comply joins 
another household as head of the household as specified under 
Sec. 273.1(d)(1) or (d)(2), that entire new household is ineligible for 
the remainder of the disqualification period. If the member who failed 
to comply joins another household where he/she is not head of household, 
the individual shall be ineligible for two months and shall be 
considered an ineligible household member pursuant to Sec. 273.1(b)(2).
    (ii) The State agency shall develop conciliation procedures to be 
used upon determining that an individual has refused or failed to comply 
with an E&T

[[Page 597]]

requirement. The purpose of the conciliation effort is to determine the 
reason(s) the work registrant did not comply with the E&T requirement 
and provide the noncomplying individual with an opportunity to comply 
prior to the issuance of the notice of adverse action. The conciliation 
period shall begin the day following the date the State agency learns of 
the noncompliance and shall continue for a period not to exceed 30 
calendar days. Within this conciliation period, the State agency shall, 
at a minimum, contact the noncomplying household member to ascertain the 
reason(s) for the noncompliance and determine whether good cause for the 
noncompliance exists, as discussed in paragraph (m) of this section. If 
good cause does not exist, the State agency shall inform the household 
member of the pertinent E&T requirements and the consequences of failing 
to comply. The household member shall be informed of the action(s) 
necessary for compliance and the date by which compliance must be 
achieved to avoid the notice of adverse action. This date may not exceed 
the end of the conciliation period. To avoid the notice of adverse 
action, the noncomplying household member must perform a verifiable act 
of compliance, such as attending a job search training session or 
submitting a report of job contacts. Verbal commitment by the household 
member is not sufficient, unless the household member is prevented from 
complying by circumstances beyond the household member's control, such 
as the unavailability of a suitable component. If it is apparent that 
the individual will not comply (i.e., the individual refuses to comply 
and does not have good cause), the State agency may end the conciliation 
period early and proceed with the issuance of the notice of adverse 
action under paragraph (g)(1)(iii) of this section. The individual's 
refusal to comply shall be documented in the casefile.
    (iii) If the work registrant does not comply during the conciliation 
period the State agency shall issue a notice of adverse action to the 
individual or household, as specified in Sec. 273.13, no later than the 
last day of the conciliation period. If the notice of adverse action is 
issued prior to the end of the conciliation period, the notice may be 
cancelled if the State agency is able to verify that compliance was 
achieved by the end of the conciliation period.
    (iv) If an individual refuses or fails to comply with any of the 
work requirements imposed by this section, other than the E&T 
requirements, the State agency shall determine whether good cause for 
the noncompliance exists, as discussed in paragraph (m) of this section. 
Within ten days of the State agency determining the noncompliance was 
without good cause, the State agency shall provide the individual or 
household with a notice of adverse action, as specified in Sec. 273.13.
    (v) The notice of adverse action shall contain the particular act of 
noncompliance committed, the proposed period of disqualification and 
shall specify that the individual or household may reapply at the end of 
the disqualification period. Information shall also be included on or 
with the notice describing the action which can be taken to end or avoid 
the sanction, and procedures contained in paragraph (h) of this section. 
The disqualification period shall begin with the first month following 
the expiration of the ten-day adverse notice period, unless a fair 
hearing is requested.
    (vi) Each individual or household has a right to request a fair 
hearing, in accordance with Sec. 273.15, to appeal a denial, reduction, 
or termination of benefits due to a determination of nonexempt status, 
or a State agency determination of failure to comply with the work 
registration or employment and training requirements of this section. 
Individuals or households may appeal State agency actions such as 
exemption status, the type of requirement imposed, or State agency 
refusal to make a finding of good cause if the individual or household 
believes that a finding of failure to comply has resulted from improper 
decisions on these matters. The State agency or its designee operating 
the relevant component shall receive sufficient advance notice to either 
permit the attendance of a representative or ensure that a 
representative will be available for questioning over the phone during 
the hearing. A representative of the appropriate agency shall be 
available

[[Page 598]]

through one of these means. A household shall be allowed to examine its 
E&T component casefile at a reasonable time before the date of the fair 
hearing, except for confidential information (which may include test 
results) that the agency determines should be protected from release. 
Confidential information not released to a household may not be used by 
either party at the hearing. The results of the fair hearing shall be 
binding on the State agency.
    (2) Failure to comply with a work requirement under title IV of the 
Social Security Act, or unemployment compensation work requirement.  A 
household containing a member who was exempt from work registration in 
accordance with paragraph (b)(1)(iii) or (b)(1)(v) of this section 
because he or she was registered for work under title IV or unemployment 
compensation and who fails to comply with a title IV or unemployment 
compensation requirement comparable to a food stamp work registration or 
employment and training program requirement shall be treated as though 
the member had failed to comply with the corresponding food stamp 
requirements.
    (i) If the State agency learns that a household member has refused 
or failed without good cause to comply with a title IV or unemployment 
compensation requirement, the State agency shall determine whether the 
requirement was comparable. Similarly, if the household reports the loss 
or denial of AFDC or unemployment compensation or if the State agency 
otherwise learns of such loss or denial, the State agency will determine 
whether the loss or denial was caused by a determination by the 
administering agency that a household member refused or failed without 
good cause to comply with the work requirement and, if so, whether the 
requirement was comparable to the work registration or employment and 
training program requirement. The title IV or unemployment compensation 
requirement shall not be considered comparable if it places 
responsibilities on the household which exceed those imposed by the food 
stamp work registration or FCS approved employment and training program 
requirements.
    (ii) If the State determines that the title IV or unemployment 
compensation requirement is comparable, the individual or household (if 
the individual who committed the violation is the head of household) 
shall be disqualified in accordance with the following provisions. The 
State agency shall provide a notice of adverse action as specified in 
Sec. 273.13 within 10 days after learning of the household member's 
noncompliance with the unemployment compensation or title IV 
requirement. The notice shall comply with the requirements of 
Sec. 273.7(g)(1). An individual or household shall not be disqualified 
from participation if the noncomplying member meets one of the work 
registration exemptions provided in Sec. 273.7(b) other than the 
exemptions provided in paragraphs (b)(1)(iii) and (b)(1)(v) of that 
section. Household members who fail to comply with a noncomparable title 
IV or unemployment compensation requirement shall lose their exemption 
under Sec. 273.7(b)(1) (iii) and (v), and must register for work if 
required to do so in Sec. 273.7(a).
    (iii) If the State agency determination of noncompliance with a 
comparable title IV or unemployment compensation work requirement leads 
to a denial or termination of the individuals or household's food stamp 
benefits, the individual or household has a right to appeal the decision 
in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 273.7(g)(1).
    (iv) A disqualified individual or household may resume participation 
in the Program in accordance with paragraph (h) of this section.
    (h) Ending disqualification. Following the end of the 2 month 
disqualification period for noncompliance with the work registration or 
employment and training requirements, participation may resume if a 
disqualified individual or household applies again and is determined 
eligible. Eligibility may be reestablished by a household during a 
disqualification period and the household shall (if otherwise eligible) 
be permitted to resume participation if the head of the household 
becomes exempt from the work registration requirement, is no longer a 
member of the household, or complies with the appropriate requirement 
listed in paragraph (h)(1) through (h)(5) of this section. An

[[Page 599]]

individual who has been disqualified for noncompliance may be permitted 
to resume participation during the disqualification period (if otherwise 
eligible) by becoming exempt from work registration or by complying with 
the following appropriate requirements:
    (1) Refusal to register--registration by the household member.
    (2) Refusal to respond to a request from the State agency or its 
designee requiring supplemental information regarding employment status 
or availability for work--compliance with the request.
    (3) Refusal to report to an employer to whom referred--reporting to 
this employer if work is still available or to another employer to whom 
referred.
    (4) Refusal to accept a bona fide offer of suitable employment to 
which referred--acceptance of the employment if still available to the 
participant, or securing other employment which yields earnings per week 
equivalent to the refused job, or securing any other employment of at 
least 30 hours per week or securing employment of less than 30 hours per 
week but with weekly earnings equal to the Federal minimum wage 
multiplied by 30 hours.
    (5) Refusal to comply with a State agency (or its designee) 
assignment as part of an FCS approved employment and training program--
compliance with the assignment or an alternative assignment by the State 
agency.
    (i) Suitable employment. (1) In addition to any criteria established 
by State agencies, employment shall be considered unsuitable if:
    (i) The wage offered is less than the highest of:
    (A) The applicable Federal minimum wage; (B) the applicable State 
minimum wage; or (C) eighty percent (80%) of the Federal minimum wage if 
neither the Federal nor State minimum wage is applicable.
    (ii) The employment offered is on a piece-rate basis and the average 
hourly yield the employee can reasonably be expected to earn is less 
than the applicable hourly wages specified under paragraph (i)(1)(i) of 
this section.
    (iii) The household member, as a condition of employment or 
continuing employment, is required to join, resign from, or refrain from 
joining any legitimate labor organization.
    (iv) The work offered is at a site subject to a strike or lockout at 
the time of the offer unless the strike has been enjoined under section 
208 of the Labor-Management Relations Act (29 U.S.C. 78) (commonly known 
as the Taft-Hartley Act), or unless an injunction has been issued under 
section 10 of the Railway Labor Act (45 U.S.C. 160).
    (2) In addition, employment shall be considered suitable unless the 
household member involved can demonstrate or the State agency otherwise 
becomes aware that:
    (i) The degree of risk to health and safety is unreasonable.
    (ii) The member is physically or mentally unfit to perform the 
employment, as documented by medical evidence or by reliable information 
from other sources.
    (iii) The employment offered within the first 30 days of 
registration is not in the member's major field of experience.
    (iv) The distance from the member's home to the place of employment 
is unreasonable considering the expected wage and the time and cost of 
commuting. Employment shall not be considered suitable if daily 
commuting time exceeds 2 hours per day, not including the transporting 
of a child to and from a child care facility. Nor shall employment be 
considered suitable if the distance to the place of employment prohibits 
walking and neither public nor private transportation is available to 
transport the member to the jobsite.
    (v) The working hours or nature of the employment interferes with 
the member's religious observances, convictions, or beliefs. For 
example, a Sabbatarian could refuse to work on the Sabbath.
    (j) Participation of strikers. Strikers whose households are 
eligible under the criteria in Sec. 273.1(g) shall be subject to the 
work registration requirements unless exempt under paragraph (b) of this 
section at the time of application.
    (k) Registration of certain PA, GA, and refugee households. (1) 
State agencies may request approval from FCS to substitute State or 
local procedures for work registration for PA households not subject to 
the work requirements

[[Page 600]]

under title IV of the Social Security Act or for GA households. Work 
requirements imposed on refugees participating in refugee resettlement 
programs including but not limited to the Indochinese Refugee Assistance 
Program may also be substituted, with FCS approval. To receive approval, 
it must be demonstrated that:
    (i) The work registration procedures are at least equivalent to food 
stamp work registration requirements;
    (ii) Registrants' activities are monitored so that appropriate 
sanctions as required by these regulations will be applied. However, if 
additional work requirements (beyond those required under this section) 
are placed on household members, a household's food stamp benefits shall 
not be denied for the failure of a household member to comply with a 
requirement that exceeds the requirements of this section. For example, 
if a State rule requires individuals to register for work through age 
65, any individual 60 years of age or older who fails to comply shall 
not be denied food stamp benefits as a result of that failure;
    (iii) All household members which are not exempt under paragraph 
(b)(1) of this section are either registered for work under such 
Federal, State or local programs as described in this paragraph, or are 
registered for work as provided in paragraph (a) of this section.
    (2) Household members who are program participants under title IV of 
the Social Security Act or registered for work under unemployment 
compensation and fail to comply with comparable work requirements of 
those programs shall be handled in accordance with the provisions in 
Sec. 273.7(g)(2).
    (l) Household members who are applying for SSI and for food stamps 
under Sec. 273.2(k)(1)(i) shall have the requirement for work 
registration waived until:
    (1) They are determined eligible for SSI and thereby become exempt 
from work registration, or
    (2) They are determined ineligible for SSI and where applicable, a 
determination of their work registration status is then made through 
recertification procedures in accordance with 
Sec. 273.2(k)(1)(iii)(B)(2), or through other means.
    (m) Determining good cause. The State agency shall be responsible 
for determining good cause in those instances where the work registrant 
has failed to comply with the work registration, employment and 
training, and voluntary quit requirements of this section. In 
determining whether or not good cause exists, the State agency shall 
consider the facts and circumstances, including information submitted by 
the household member involved and the employer. Good cause shall include 
circumstances beyond the member's control, such as, but not limited to, 
illness, illness of another household member requiring the presence of 
the member, a household emergency, the unavailability of transportation, 
or the lack of adequate child care for children who have reached age six 
but are under age 12.
    (n) Voluntary quit. No household whose head of household, as defined 
in Sec. 273.1(d)(2), voluntarily quit a job of 20 hours a week or more 
without good cause 60 days or less prior to the date of application or 
at any time thereafter shall be eligible for participation in the 
program as specified below. At the time of application, the State agency 
shall explain to the applicant the consequences of the head of household 
quitting a job without good cause, and of the consequence of a person 
joining the household as its head if that individual has voluntarily 
quit employment.
    (1) Determining whether a voluntary quit occurred and application 
processing. (i) When a household files an application for participation, 
or when a participating household reports the loss of a source of 
income, the State agency shall determine whether any household member 
voluntarily quit his or her job. Benefits shall not be delayed beyond 
the normal processing times specified in Sec. 273.2 pending the outcome 
of this determination. This provision applies only if the employment 
involved 20 hours or more per week or provided weekly earnings at least 
equivalent to the Federal minimum wage multiplied by 20 hours; the quit 
occurred within 60 days prior to the date of application or anytime 
thereafter; and the quit was

[[Page 601]]

without good cause. Changes in employment status that result from 
reducing hours of employment while working for the same employer, 
terminating a self-employment enterprise or resigning from a job at the 
demand of the employer will not be considered a voluntary quit for 
purposes of this section. An employee of the Federal Government, or of a 
State or local government who participates in a strike against such 
government, and is dismissed from his or her job because of 
participation in the strike, shall be considered to have voluntarily 
quit his or her job without good cause. If an individual quits a job, 
secures new employment at comparable wages or hours and is then laid off 
or, through no fault of his own loses the new job, the earlier quit will 
not form the basis of a disqualification.
    (ii) In the case of an applicant household, the State agency shall 
determine whether any currently unemployed (i.e. employed less than 20 
hours per week or receiving less than weekly earnings equivalent to the 
Federal minimum wage multiplied by 20 hours) household member who is 
required to register for work or who is exempt through 
Sec. 273.7(b)(1)(vii) has voluntarily quit his or her job within the 
last 60 days. If the State agency learns that a household has lost a 
source of income after the date of application but before the household 
is certified, the State agency shall determine whether a voluntarily 
quit occurred.
    (iii) The State agency shall determine whether any household member 
voluntarily quit his or her job while participating in the Program, 
within 60 days prior to applying for participation, or in the time 
between application and certification. If a household is already 
participating when a quit which occurred prior to certification is 
discovered, the household shall be regarded as a participating household 
and the 90 day sanction shall be imposed in accordance with 
Sec. 273.7(n)(1)(vi).
    (iv) If a determination of voluntary quit is established, the State 
agency shall then determine if the member who quit is the head of 
household as defined in Sec. 273.1(d)(2).
    (v) Upon the determination that the head of household voluntarily 
quit employment, the State agency shall determine if the voluntary quit 
was with good cause as defined in Sec. 273.7(n)(3). In the case of an 
applicant household, if the voluntary quit was without good cause, the 
household's application for participation shall be denied and sanction 
imposed for 90 days, starting from the date of quit. The State agency 
shall provide the applicant household with a notice of denial in 
accordance with Sec. 273.2(g)(3). The notice shall inform the household 
of the proposed period of disqualification; its right to reapply at the 
end of the 90 day period; and of its right to a fair hearing. In the 
case of participating households, benefits shall be terminated for a 
period of 90 days, in accordance with paragraph (n)(1)(vi) of this 
section.
    (vi) If the State agency determines that the head of a participating 
household voluntarily quit his or her job while participating in the 
program or discovers a quit which occured within 60 days prior to 
application for benefits or between application and certification, the 
State agency shall provide the household with a notice of adverse action 
as specified in Sec. 273.13 within 10 days after the determination of a 
quit. Such notification shall contain the particular act of 
noncompliance committed, the proposed period of ineligibility, the 
actions which may be taken to end or avoid the disqualification, and 
shall specify that the household may reapply at the end of the 
disqualification period. Except as otherwise specified in this 
paragraph, the period of ineligibility shall run continuously for three 
months or 90 days, beginning with the first of the month after all 
normal procedures for taking adverse action have been followed. The 90 
day disqualification period may be converted to a three calendar month 
period only for participating households. If a voluntary quit occurs in 
the last month of a certification period or is determined in the last 30 
days of the certification period the household shall be denied 
recertification for a period of 90 days beginning with the day after the 
last certification period ends. If such household does not apply for 
food

[[Page 602]]

stamp benefits by the end of the certification period, a claim shall be 
established for the benefits received by the household for up to 90 days 
beginning the first of the month after the month in which the quit 
occurred. If there are fewer than 90 days from the first of the month 
after the month in which the quit occurred to the end of the 
certification period, a claim shall be imposed, and the household shall 
remain ineligible for benefits for a prorated number of days, with the 
end result that a claim was established or the household was ineligible 
for a full 90 day period. Each household has a right to a fair hearing 
to appeal a denial or termination of benefits due to a determination 
that the head of household voluntarily quit his or her job without good 
cause. If the participating household's benefits are continued pending a 
fair hearing and the State agency determination is upheld, the 
disqualification period shall begin the first of the month after the 
hearing decision is rendered.
    (vii) Persons who have been disqualified for quitting a job as head 
of one household will carry their sanction with them if they join a new 
household as its head. The new household will remain ineligible for the 
remainder of the sanction period unless the person who caused the 
disqualification ends it in a manner prescribed in Sec. 273.7(n)(5). If 
an individual who voluntarily quit joins a new household and is not the 
household head the sanction shall be terminated as specified under 
Sec. 273.1(d)(1) or (d)(2).
    (viii) If an application for participation in the Program is filed 
in the third month of disqualification, the State agency shall in accord 
with Sec. 273.10(a)(3) use the same application for the denial of 
benefits in the remaining month of disqualification and certification 
for any subsequent month(s) if all other eligibility criteria are met.
    (2) Exemptions from voluntary quit provisions. Persons who are 
exempt from the work registration provisions in Sec. 273.7(b) at the 
time of the quit, with the exception of those exempted by 
Sec. 273.7(b)(1)(vii) shall be exempt from the voluntary quit 
provisions.
    (3) Good cause. Good cause for leaving employment includes the good 
cause provisions found in Sec. 273.7(m), and resigning from a job that 
does not meet the suitability criteria specified in Sec. 273.7(i). Good 
cause for leaving employment shall also include:
    (i) Discrimination by an employer based on age, race, sex, color, 
handicap, religious beliefs, national origin or political beliefs;
    (ii) Work demands or conditions that render continued employment 
unreasonable, such as working without being paid on schedule;
    (iii) Acceptance by the head of household of employment, or 
enrollment of at least half-time in any recognized school, training 
program or institution of higher education, that requires the head of 
household to leave employment;
    (iv) Acceptance by any other household member of employment or 
enrollment at least half-time in any recognized school, training program 
or institution of higher education in another county or similar 
political subdivision which requires the household to move and thereby 
requires the head of household to leave employment;
    (v) Resignations by persons under the age of 60 which are recognized 
by the employer as retirement;
    (vi) Employment which becomes unsuitable by not meeting the criteria 
specified in Sec. 273.7(i) after the acceptance of such employment;
    (vii) Acceptance of a bona fide offer of employment of more than 20 
hours a week or in which the weekly earnings are equivalent to the 
Federal minimum wage multiplied by 20 hours which, because of 
circumstances beyond the control of the primary wage earner, 
subsequently either does not materialize or results in employment of 
less than 20 hours a week or weekly earnings of less than the Federal 
minimum wage multiplied by 20 hours; and
    (viii) Leaving a job in connection with patterns of employment in 
which workers frequently move from one employer to another such as 
migrant farm labor or construction work. There may be some circumstances 
where households will apply for food stamp benefits between jobs 
particularly in cases where work may not yet be available

[[Page 603]]

at the new job site. Even though employment at the new site has not 
actually begun, the quitting of the previous employment shall be 
considered as with good cause if part of the pattern of that type of 
employment.
    (4) Verification. (i) To the extent that the information given by 
the household is questionable, as defined in Sec. 273.2(f)(2), State 
agencies shall request verification of the household's statements. The 
primary responsibility for providing verification as provided in 
Sec. 273.2(f)(5) rests with the household. If it is difficult or 
impossible for the household to obtain documentary evidence in a timely 
manner, the State agency shall offer assistance to the household to 
obtain the needed verification. Acceptable sources of verification 
include but are not limited to the previous employer, employee 
associations, union representatives and grievance committees or 
organizations. Whenever documentary evidence cannot be obtained, the 
State agency shall substitute a collateral contact. The State agency is 
responsible for obtaining verification from acceptable collateral 
contacts provided by the household.
    (ii) If the household and State agency are unable to obtain 
requested verification from these or other sources because the cause for 
the quit resulted from circumstances that for good reason cannot be 
verified, such as a resignation from employment due to discrimination 
practices or unreasonable demands by an employer or because the employer 
cannot be located, the household will not be denied access to the 
Program.
    (5) Ending a voluntary quit disqualification. (i) Following the end 
of the disqualification period a household may begin participation in 
the program if it applies again and is determined eligible.
    (ii) Eligibility may be reestablished during a disqualification 
period and the household shall, if otherwise eligible, be permitted to 
resume participation if the member who caused the disqualification 
secures new employment which is comparable in salary or hours to the job 
which was quit, or leaves the household. Comparable employment may 
entail fewer hours or a lower net salary than the job which was quit. 
Eligibility may also be reestablished if the violator becomes exempt 
from the work registration requirements through Sec. 273.7(b) other than 
paragraphs (b)(1)(iii) or (b)(1)(v) of that section. Should a household 
which has been determined to be noncompliant without good cause split 
into more than one household, the sanction shall follow the member who 
caused the disqualification. If a head of household who committed the 
violation joins another food stamp household as head of the household, 
that household shall be ineligible for the balance of the period of 
ineligibility.
    (iii) A household determined ineligible due to a voluntary quit 
without good cause may reestablish eligibility if a new and otherwise 
eligible member joins as its head of household as defined by 
Sec. 273.1(d)(2).
    (o) Performance standards. The Secretary shall establish an annual 
performance standard for the minimum number of eligible persons that 
States must place in employment and training programs.
    (1) Performance formula. To ascertain a State's level of performance 
at the end of each fiscal year, FCS will divide the number of E&T 
mandatory participants plus volunteers the State has ``placed'' in its 
E&T program over the course of the year (the numerator) by the number of 
E&T mandatory participants who were eligible to have been placed in the 
program over the course of the year plus volunteers (the denominator). 
The denominator is herein referred to as the ``base of eligibles.''
    (2) Counting placements in an employment and training program. State 
agencies may consider a person placed in an E&T program, for purposes of 
performance standards, if the person commences an employment and 
training component, or fails to comply with E&T requirements and is 
denied certification or is sent a Notice of Adverse Action for the 
noncompliance. NOAAs sent for noncompliance with work registration 
optional workfare or voluntary quit shall not count as placements. 
Assigned persons who have good cause for noncompliance shall not be 
counted as placed. If the good cause for the noncompliance is temporary 
(less

[[Page 604]]

than 60 days), the person shall be referred again to a component as soon 
as practicable. If the good cause represents a situation or condition 
which will continue for 60 days or more, the person shall be considered 
exempt by the State agency. If a participant reports to a component 
which involves several months, that individual would be counted as 
placed in the initial month only. Each time a participant is placed in a 
different component after having completed a prior component, he/she may 
be counted as placed. If participation in one type of E&T component is 
not continuous, the participant may be counted as having been placed 
more than once in the same component. If an E&T mandatory participant 
does not comply with E&T requirements, and a Notice of Adverse Action is 
sent, the person is counted as placed in the month the NOAA is mailed.
    (3) Counting the ``base of eligibles''. The base of persons eligible 
to participate in an E&T program (the denominator) consists of all 
nonexempt work registrants in the month of October plus newly work 
registered food stamp recipients who have not been exempted by the State 
under Sec. 273.7(f)(2) of these regulations from participation in an E&T 
program, and food stamp program applicants who are assigned by the State 
to enter an E&T component at the time of application and are 
subsequently certified for food stamp participation. These groups are 
considered E&T mandatory participants. In addition, volunteers who are 
placed in an E&T component shall be counted in the base of eligibles. 
State agencies need not count any individual in the base of eligibles 
more than once in a fiscal year. For purposes of computing the base of 
eligibles for the two performance standard reporting periods of Fiscal 
Year 1989 (first quarter and the remaining three quarters) the first 
quarter base of eligibles is the cumulative total of 25 percent of the 
number of E&T mandatory participants in the State in October 1988 
(including persons in work registrant status carried over from the 
previous fiscal year), plus new E&T mandatory participants registered 
during November and December 1988, plus volunteers placed in E&T 
components during the quarter. The second performance period base of 
eligibles is the total of 75 percent of the October 1988 count of E&T 
mandatory participants plus new E&T mandatory participants registered 
during the months of January through September 1989, plus volunteers 
placed in E&T components during these same nine months.
    (4) Applicant participation. Some States may wish to operate a job 
search or other component which begins at the time of Food Stamp Program 
application. The applicants who are placed in this component (who either 
perform the job search or who do not and are denied eligibility for 
failure to comply with the E&T requirement) should be counted as 
``placed''. These persons need be counted in the base of eligibles, or 
the denominator, only if their application is approved, they are 
certified for food stamp benefits and they are work registered. At that 
time, they should be counted as ``newly work registered'' if they have 
not been counted in this category in the previous 12 months. If an 
applicant performs a job search and is either denied eligibility, for 
causes other than non-compliance with the E&T requirements, or certified 
but exempted from work registration, the individual need not be counted 
in the base of eligibles.
    (5) Accounting for short-term participants. There are a number of 
work registrants considered E&T mandatory who are counted in the base of 
eligibles but who remain on the Food Stamp Program for such a short 
period of time States are unable to place them in an E&T component. 
These short term recipients inflate the State's base of eligibles and 
make it more difficult for States to meet their performance standard. 
States may choose one of two methods to counteract the effects of short 
term participants.
    (i) States may exempt from E&T participation persons who will leave 
the Food Stamp Program within 30 days of application. This may mean that 
States will not attempt to serve such persons unless they volunteer for 
E&T participation. States must count each individual as having been 
exempted under the reporting requirements of Sec. 273.7(c)(6)(ii).

[[Page 605]]

    (ii) States may, at the close of the fiscal year, subtract 10 
percent from their base of eligibles (denominator) to account for E&T 
mandatory participants who have left the program within 30 days of 
application. This 10 percent adjustment may be made without supporting 
documentation. Since the short term mandatory participants are not 
exempted from participation, States may attempt to place them in a 
component and may count them as placed (in their numerator) if they meet 
the placement criteria of paragraph (o)(2) of this section. For Fiscal 
Year 1989, this 10 percent adjustment may be applied to the base of 
eligible totals for each reporting period resulting from the 
computations specified in paragraph (o)(3) of this section.
    (6) Performance data collection. To determine the annual total in 
the base of eligibles (denominator), State agencies shall count the 
number of E&T mandatory participants (non-exempt work registrants) in 
the State during the month of October, including persons in that status 
who were work registered the prior year. The number of newly work 
registered E&T mandatory participants for each subsequent month should 
be added to the October count. Volunteers placed in components shall be 
added for each month of the fiscal year. Separate counts shall be 
maintained for E&T mandatory participants and volunteers. To determine 
the number of persons ``placed'' in an E&T program (numerator), the 
State agency shall count and add cumulatively every month non-exempt 
work registrants and volunteers who were ``placed'' in a component, as 
defined in paragraph (o)(2) of this section.
    (7) Percentage of persons to be placed. Beginning in Fiscal Year 
1992, 10 percent of the number of mandatory E&T participants, plus 
volunteers who participated, shall be placed in an E&T Program. This 
performance standard shall remain in effect through Fiscal Year 1995.
    (8) Variations in performance standards. (i) The Department will 
adjust the performance standard for an individual State agency if the 
State agency can show, prospectively, that the components it plans to 
offer or the type of participant it plans to serve will require 
significantly higher levels of service. If a State proposes that its 
performance standard be adjusted, it should propose the amount of the 
requested adjustment and provide a justification. The additional 
documentation called for in Sec. 273.7(c) must be submitted to FCS in 
the State's employment and training plan. In determining whether an 
adjustment of the performance standard is warranted and the level of the 
adjustment, FCS will consider the number of persons who will be placed, 
the percentage of planned placements compared to the State's E&T 
mandatory population, the intensity and effectiveness of the components, 
and the cost.
    (ii) Only in extraordinary circumstances should a State expect to 
have a performance standard approved which is lower than 40 percent of 
the nationwide standard.
    (p) State noncompliance with Employment and Training requirements. 
(1) If a State agency fails to efficiently and effectively administer 
its employment and training program, the provisions of Sec. 276.1(a)(3) 
shall apply.
    (2) If a State has failed to meet its established performance 
standard, FCS shall determine whether there was good cause for the 
noncompliance. Good cause for State noncompliance is specified in 
Sec. 276.6. In determining whether a State agency has met a performance 
standard, the Secretary will also consider factors such as the extent to 
which volunteers have participated in the employment and training 
program, placements in unsubsidized employment, increases in earnings 
and the reduction in the number of persons participating in the Food 
Stamp Program, and changes in the States caseload, if the State supplies 
the Agency with appropriate documentation. Lack of E & T funding at the 
100 percent Federal level shall not constitute good cause.
    (3) If the Agency finds that there was not sufficient good cause for 
the State's failure to meet its performance standards the Agency may 
disallow administrative funds. The dollar amount of the funds disallowed 
shall be calculated by reducing the amount of the State's 100 percent 
Federal employment and training allocation for the

[[Page 606]]

pertinent year proportionately to the percentage below its standard the 
State's performance fell. This amount shall then be disallowed from the 
State's administrative funds as specified in Sec. 276.4(c) except that 
no formal warning is required. The Secretary may withhold a larger 
percentage of the allocation depending on the severity of the 
noncompliance. Appeal and administrative review provisions of 
Sec. 276.1(b), shall apply.
    (4) In addition to the disallowance described in paragraph (p)(2) of 
this section, a State agency shall not receive performance-based funding 
for a given fiscal year in accordance with paragraph (d)(1)(i)(B) of 
this section, if the State agency does not meet its performance standard 
(as establish prospectively) for the second preceding fiscal year.

[Amdt. 132, 43 FR 47889, Oct. 17, 1978]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 273.7, 
see the List of CFR Sections Affected in the Finding Aids section of 
this volume.


<R05>
Sec. 273.8  Resource eligibility standards.

    (a) Uniform standards. The State agency shall apply the uniform 
national resource standards of eligibility to all applicant households, 
including those households in which members are recipients of federally 
aided public assistance, general assistance, or supplemental security 
income. Households which are categorically eligible as defined in 
Sec. 273.2(j)(2) or 273.2(j)(4) do not have to meet the resource limits 
or definitions in this section.
    (b) Maximum allowable resources. The maximum allowable resources, 
including both liquid and nonliquid assets, of all members of the 
household shall not exceed $2,000 for the household, except that, for 
households including a member or members age 60 or over, such resources 
shall not exceed $3,000.
    (c) Definition of resources. In determining the resources of a 
household, the following shall be included and documented by the State 
agency in sufficient detail to permit verification:
    (1) Liquid resources, such as cash on hand, money in checking or 
savings accounts, savings certificates, stocks or bonds, lump sum 
payments as specified in Sec. 273.9(c)(8), funds held in individual 
retirement accounts (IRA's), and funds held in Keogh plans which do not 
involve the household member in a contractual relationship with 
individuals who are not household members. In counting resources of 
households with IRA's or includable Keogh plans, the State agency shall 
include the total cash value of the account or plan minus the amount of 
the penalty (if any) that would be exacted for the early withdrawal of 
the entire amount in the account or plan; and
    (2) Nonliquid resources, personal property, licensed and unlicensed 
vehicles, buildings, land, recreational properties, and any other 
property, provided that these resources are not specifically excluded 
under paragraph (e) of this section. The value of nonexempt resources, 
except for licensed vehicles as specified in paragraph (h) of this 
section, shall be its equity value. The equity value is the fair market 
value less encumbrances.
    (3) For households containing sponsored aliens (as defined in 
Sec. 273.11(j)(1)), resources shall also include that portion of the 
resources of an alien's sponsor and the sponsor's spouse (if living with 
the sponsor) which have been deemed to be those of the alien in 
accordance with the procedures established in Sec. 273.11(j), unless the 
sponsored alien is otherwise exempt from this provision in accordance 
with Sec. 273.11(j).
    (d) Jointly owned resources. Resources owned jointly by separate 
households shall be considered available in their entirety to each 
household, unless it can be demonstrated by the applicant household that 
such resources are inaccessible to that household. If the household can 
demonstrate that it has access to only a portion of the resource, the 
value of that portion of the resource shall be counted toward the 
household's resource level. The resource shall be considered totally 
inaccessible to the household if the resource cannot practically be 
subdivided and the household's access to the value of the resource is 
dependent on the agreement of a joint owner who refuses to comply. For 
the purpose of this provision, ineligible aliens or disqualified 
individuals residing with the household

[[Page 607]]

shall be considered household members. Resources shall be considered 
inaccessible to persons residing in shelters for battered women and 
children, as defined in Sec. 271.2, if
    (1) The resources are jointly owned by such persons and by members 
of their former household; and
    (2) The shelter resident's access to the value of the resources is 
dependent on the agreement of a joint owner who still resides in the 
former household.
    (e) Exclusions from resources. In determining the resources of a 
household, only the following shall be excluded:
    (1) The home and surrounding property which is not separated from 
the home by intervening property owned by others. Public rights of way, 
such as roads which run through the surrounding property and separate it 
from the home, will not affect the exemption of the property. The home 
and surrounding property shall remain exempt when temporarily unoccupied 
for reasons of employment, training for future employment, illness, or 
uninhabitability caused by casualty or natural disaster, if the 
household intends to return. Households that currently do not own a 
home, but own or are purchasing a lot on which they intend to build or 
are building a permanent home, shall receive an exclusion for the value 
of the lot and, if it is partially completed, for the home.
    (2) Household goods, personal effects, the cash value of life 
insurance policies, one burial plot per household member, and the value 
of one bona fide funeral agreement per household member, provided that 
the agreement does not exceed $1,500 in equity value, in which event the 
value above $1,500 is counted. The cash value of pension plans or funds 
shall be excluded, except that Keogh plans which involve no contractual 
relationship with individuals who are not household members and 
individual retirement accounts (IRA's) shall not be excluded under this 
paragraph.
    (3) Licensed vehicles shall be excluded as specified in paragraph 
(h) of this section. The exclusion also includes unlicensed vehicles on 
those Indian reservations that do not require vehicles driven by tribal 
members to be licensed.
    (4) Property which annually produces income consistent with its fair 
market value, even if only used on a seasonal basis. Such property shall 
include rental homes and vacation homes.
    (5) Property, such as farm land or work related equipment, such as 
the tools of a tradesman or the machinery of a farmer, which is 
essential to the employment or self-employment of a household member. 
Property essential to the self-employment of a household member engaged 
in farming shall continue to be excluded for one year from the date the 
household member terminates his/her self-employment from farming.
    (6) Installment contracts for the sale of land or buildings if the 
contract or agreement is producing income consistent with its fair 
market value. The exclusion shall also apply to the value of the 
property sold under the installment contract, or held as security in 
exchange for a purchase price consistent with the fair market value of 
that property.
    (7) Any governmental payments which are designated for the 
restoration of a home damaged in a disaster, if the household is subject 
to a legal sanction if the funds are not used as intended; for example, 
payments made by the Department of Housing and Urban Development through 
the individual and family grant program or disaster loans or grants made 
by the Small Business Administration.
    (8) Resources having a cash value which is not accessible to the 
household, such as but not limited to, irrevocable trust funds, security 
deposits on rental property or utilities, property in probate, and real 
property which the household is making a good faith effort to sell at a 
reasonable price and which has not been sold. The State agency may 
verify that the property is for sale and that the household has not 
declined a reasonable offer. Verification may be obtained through a 
collateral contact or documentation, such as an advertisement for public 
sale in a newspaper of general circulation or a listing with a real 
estate broker. Any funds in a trust or transferred to a trust, and the 
income produced by that trust to the extent it is not available

[[Page 608]]

to the household, shall be considered inaccessible to the household if:
    (i) The trust arrangement is not likely to cease during the 
certification period and no household member has the power to revoke the 
trust arrangement or change the name of the beneficiary during the 
certification period;
    (ii) The trustee administering the funds is either:
    (A) A court, or an institution, corporation, or organization which 
is not under the direction or ownership of any household member, or (B) 
an individual appointed by the court who has court imposed limitations 
placed on his/her use of the funds which meet the requirements of this 
paragraph;
    (iii) Trust investments made on behalf of the trust do not directly 
involve or assist any business or corporation under the control, 
direction, or influence of a household member; and
    (iv) The funds held in irrevocable trust are either:
    (A) Established from the household's own funds, if the trustee uses 
the funds solely to make investments on behalf of the trust or to pay 
the educational or medical expenses of any person named by the household 
creating the trust, or (B) established from non-household funds by a 
nonhousehold member.
    (9) Resources, such as those of students or self-employed persons, 
which have been prorated as income. The treatment of student income is 
explained in Sec. 273.10(c) and the treatment of self-employment income 
is explained in Sec. 273.11(a).
    (10) Indian lands held jointly with the Tribe, or land that can be 
sold only with the approval of the Department of the Interior's Bureau 
of Indian Affairs; and
    (11) Resources which are excluded for food stamp purposes by express 
provision of Federal statute. The following is a listing of some of the 
resources excluded by Federal statute:
    (i) Payments received under the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act 
(Pub. L. 92-203, section 21(a)) or the Sac and Fox Indian claims 
agreement (Pub. L. 94-189);
    (ii) Payments received by certain Indian tribal members under Pub. 
L. 94-114, section 6, regarding submarginal land held in trust by the 
United States;
    (iii) Benefits received from the special supplemental food program 
for women, infants and children (WIC) (Pub. L. 92-443, section 9);
    (iv) Reimbursements from the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real 
Property Acquisition Policy Act of 1970 (Pub. L. 91-646, section 216);
    (v) Earned income tax credits received before January 1, 1980, as a 
result of Pub. L. 95-600, the Revenue Act of 1978.
    (vi) Payments received from the disposition of funds to the Grand 
River Band of Ottawa Indians (Pub. L. 94-540).
    (vii) Payments received by the Confederated Tribes and Bands of the 
Yakima Indian Nation and the Apache Tribe of the Mescalero Reservation 
from the Indian Claims Commission as designated under Pub. L. 95-433, 
section 2.
    (viii) Payments to the Passamaquoddy Tribe and the Penobscot Nation 
or any of their members received pursuant to the Maine Indian Claims 
Settlement Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-420, section 5).
    (ix) Payments of relocation assistance to members of the Navajo and 
Hopi Tribes under Pub. L. 93-531.
    (12) Earned income tax credits shall be excluded as follows:
    (i) A Federal earned income tax credit received either as a lump sum 
or as payments under section 3507 of the Internal Revenue Code for the 
month of receipt and the following month for the individual and that 
individual's spouse.
    (ii) Any Federal, State or local earned income tax credit received 
by any household member shall be excluded for 12 months, provided the 
household was participating in the Food Stamp Program at the time of 
receipt of the earned income tax credit and provided the household 
participates continuously during that 12-month period. Breaks in 
participation of one month or less due to administrative reasons, such 
as delayed recertification or missing or late monthly reports, shall not 
be considered as nonparticipation in determining the 12-month exclusion.

[[Page 609]]

    (13) Where an exclusion applies because of use of a resource by or 
for a household member, the exclusion shall also apply when the resource 
is being used by or for an ineligible alien or disqualified person whose 
resources are being counted as part of the household's resources. For 
example, work related equipment essential to the employment of an 
ineligible alien or disqualified person shall be excluded (in accordance 
with paragraph (e)(5) of this section), as shall one burial plot per 
ineligible alien or disqualified household member (in accordance with 
paragraph (e)(2) of this section).
    (14) Energy assistance payments or allowances excluded as income 
under Sec. 273.9(c)(11).
    (15) Non-liquid asset(s) against which a lien has been placed as a 
result of taking out a business loan and the household is prohibited by 
the security or lien agreement with the lien holder (creditor) from 
selling the asset(s).
    (16) Property, real or personal, to the extent that it is directly 
related to the maintenance or use of a vehicle excluded under paragraphs 
(h)(1)(i), (h)(1)(ii) or (h)(1)(v) of this section. Only that portion of 
real property determined necessary for maintenance or use is excludable 
under this provision. For example, a household which owns a produce 
truck to earn its livelihood may be prohibited from parking the truck in 
a residential area. The household may own a 100-acre field and use a 
quarter-acre of the field to park and/or service the truck. Only the 
value of the quarter-acre would be excludable under this provision, not 
the entire 100-acre field.
    (17) The resources of a household member who receives SSI or PA 
benefits. A household member is considered a recipient of these benefits 
if the benefits have been authorized but not received, if the benefits 
are suspended or recouped, or if the benefits are not paid because they 
are less than a minimum amount. Individuals entitled to Medicaid 
benefits only are not considered recipients of SSI or PA.
    (18) State agencies shall develop clear and uniform standards for 
identifying kinds of resources that, as a practical matter, the 
household is unable to sell for any significant return because the 
household's interest is relatively slight or because the costs of 
selling the household's interest would be relatively great. A resource 
shall be so identified if its sale or other disposition is unlikely to 
produce any significant amount of funds for the support of the 
household. This provision does not apply to financial instruments such 
as stocks, bonds, and negotiable financial instruments, or to vehicles. 
The determination of whether any part of the value of a vehicle is 
included as a resource shall be handled using the provisions of 
paragraph (h) of this section. The State agency may require verification 
of the value of a resource to be excluded if the information provided by 
the household is questionable. The following definitions shall be used 
in developing these standards:
    (i) Significant return shall be any return, after estimated costs of 
sale or disposition, and taking into account the ownership interest of 
the household, that is estimated to be one half or more of the 
applicable resource limit for the household; and
    (ii) Any significant amount of funds shall be funds amounting to one 
half or more of the applicable resource limit for the household.
    (f) Handling of excluded funds. Excluded funds that are kept in a 
separate account, and that are not commingled in an account with 
nonexcluded funds, shall retain their resource exclusion for an 
unlimited period of time. The resources of students and self-employment 
households which are excluded as provided in paragraph (e)(9) of this 
section and are commingled in an account with nonexcluded funds shall 
retain their exclusion for the period of time over which they have been 
prorated as income. All other excluded moneys which are commingled in an 
account with nonexcluded funds shall retain their exemption for six 
months from the date they are commingled. After six months from the date 
of commingling, all funds in the commingled account shall be counted as 
a resource.
    (g) Fair market value of licensed vehicles. The fair market value of 
licensed automobiles, trucks, and vans will be determined by the value 
of those vehicles as listed in publications written for the purpose of 
providing guidance

[[Page 610]]

to automobile dealers and loan companies. Publications listing the value 
of vehicles are usually referred to as ``blue books.'' The State agency 
shall insure that the blue book used to determine the value of licensed 
vehicles has been updated within the last 6 months. The National 
Automobile Dealers Association's (NADA) Used Car Guide Book is a 
commonly available and frequently updated publication. The State agency 
shall assign the wholesale value to vehicles. If the term ``wholesale 
value'' is not used in a particular blue book, the State agency shall 
assign the listed value which is comparable to the wholesale value. The 
State agency shall not increase the basic value of a vehicle by adding 
the value of low mileage or other factors such as optional equipment. A 
household may indicate that for some reason, such as body damage or 
inoperability, a vehicle is in less than average condition. Any 
household which claims that the blue book value does not apply to its 
vehicle shall be given the opportunity to acquire verification of the 
true value from a reliable source. Also, households shall be asked to 
acquire verification of the value of licensed antique, custom made, or 
classic vehicles, if the State agency is unable to make an accurate 
appraisal. If a vehicle is especially equipped with apparatus for the 
handicapped, the apparatus shall not increase the value of the vehicle. 
The blue book value shall be assigned as if the vehicle were not so 
equipped. If a vehicle is no longer listed in the blue book, the 
household's estimate of the value of the vehicle shall be accepted, 
unless the State agency has reason to believe the estimate is incorrect. 
In that case, and if it appears that the vehicle's value will affect 
eligibility, the household shall obtain an appraisal or produce other 
evidence of its value, such as a tax assessment or a newspaper 
advertisement which indicates the amount for which like vehicles are 
being sold. If a new vehicle is not yet listed in the blue book, the 
State agency shall determine the wholesale value through some other 
means (e.g., contacting a car dealer which sells that make of vehicle).
    (h) Handling of licensed vehicles. The value of licensed vehicles 
shall be excluded or counted as a resource as follows:
    (1) The entire value of any licensed vehicle shall be excluded if 
the vehicle is:
    (i) Used primarily (over 50 percent of the time the vehicle is used) 
for income producing purposes such as, but not limited to, a taxi, 
truck, or fishing boat. Licensed vehicles which have previously been 
used by a self-employed household member engaged in farming but are no 
longer used over 50 percent of the time in farming because the household 
member has terminated his/her self-employment from farming shall 
continue to be excluded as a resource for one year from the date the 
household member terminated his/her self-employment from farming;
    (ii) Annually producing income consistent with its fair market 
value, even if used only on a seasonal basis;
    (iii) Necessary for long distance travel, other than daily 
commuting, that is essential to the employment of a household member (or 
ineligible alien or disqualified person whose resources are being 
considered available to the household), for example, the vehicle of a 
traveling sales person or a migrant farmworker following the work 
stream.
    (iv) Used as the household's home and, therefore, excluded under 
paragraph (e)(1) of this section; or
    (v) Necessary to transport a physically disabled household member 
(or ineligible alien or disqualified person whose resources are being 
considered available to the household) regardless of the purpose of such 
transportation (limited to one vehicle per physically disabled household 
member). A vehicle shall be considered necessary for the transportation 
of a physically disabled household member if the vehicle is specially 
equipped to meet the specific needs of the disabled person or if the 
vehicle is a special type of vehicle that makes it possible to transport 
the disabled person. The vehicle need not have special equipment or be 
used primarily by or for the transportation of the physically disabled 
household member; or
    (vi) Necessary to carry fuel for heating or water for home use when 
such

[[Page 611]]

transported fuel or water is anticipated to be the primary source of 
fuel or water for the household during the certification period. 
Households shall receive this resource exclusion without having to meet 
any additional tests concerning the nature, capabilities, or other uses 
of the vehicle. Households shall not be required to furnish 
documentation, as mandated by Sec. 273.2(f)(4), unless the exclusion of 
the vehicle is questionable. If the basis for exclusion of the vehicle 
is questionable, the State agency may require documentation from the 
household, in accordance with Sec. 273.2(f)(4).
    (2) The exclusion in paragraphs (h)(1) (i) through (iv) of this 
section will apply when the vehicle is not in use because of temporary 
unemployment, such as when a taxi driver is ill and cannot work, or when 
a fishing boat is frozen in and cannot be used.
    (3) Each licensed vehicle not excluded under paragraph (h)(1) of 
this section shall be evaluated individually to determine its fair 
market value resource exclusion limit, and that portion of the resource 
exclusion limit which exceeds $4,500 for FY 1993, shall be attributed in 
full toward the household's resource level regardless of any 
encumbrances. The $4,500 fair market value resource exclusion limit for 
licensed vehicles shall remain in effect through August 31, 1994. On 
September 1, 1994 through September 30, 1995, the fair market value 
resource exclusion limit shall be increased to $4,550. On October 1, 
1995 through September 30, 1996, the fair market value resource 
exclusion limit shall be increased to $4,600. On October 1, 1996 and 
each October 1 thereafter, using a base of $5,000, the fair market value 
resource exclusion limit for licensed vehicles shall be adjusted to 
reflect changes in the new car component of the Consumer Price Index for 
All Urban Consumers published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics for the 
12-month period ending on June 30 preceding the date of such adjustment 
and rounded to the nearest $50. Any value in excess of the appropriate 
fair market value resource exclusion limit shall be attributed in full 
toward the household's resource level, regardless of any encumbrances on 
the vehicle. For example, in November 1994 a household owning an 
automobile with a fair market value of $5,550 shall have $1,000 applied 
toward its resource exclusion level. Any value in excess of $4,550 (the 
fair market value resource exclusion limit for that time period) shall 
be attributed to the household's resource level, regardless of the 
amount of the household's investment in the vehicle, and regardless of 
whether or not the vehicle is used to transport household members to and 
from employment. Each vehicle shall be appraised individually. The fair 
market value resource exclusion limit of two or more vehicles shall not 
be added together to reach a total fair market value resource exclusion 
in excess of the fair market value resource exclusion for the 
appropriate time period.
    (4) Licensed vehicles shall also be evaluated for their equity 
value, except for:
    (i) Vehicles excluded in paragraph (h)(1) of this section; (ii) one 
licensed vehicle per household, regardless of the use of the vehicle; 
and (iii) any other vehicle used to transport household members (or an 
ineligible alien or disqualified household member whose resources are 
being considered available to household) to and from employment, or to 
and from training or education which is preparatory to employment, or to 
seek employment in compliance with the employment and training criteria. 
A vehicle customarily used to commute to and from employment shall be 
covered by this equity exclusion during temporary periods of 
unemployment. The equity value of licensed vehicles not covered by this 
exclusion, and of unlicensed vehicles not excluded by paragraphs (e)(3), 
(4), or (5) of this section, shall be attributed toward the household's 
resource level.
    (5) In the event a licensed vehicle is assigned both a fair market 
value in excess of $4,500 and an equity value, only the greater of the 
two amounts shall be counted as a resource. For example, a second car 
which is not used by a household member to go to work will be evaluated 
for both fair market value and for equity value. If the fair market 
value is $5,000 and the equity value is $1,000 the household shall be 
credited with only the $1,000 equity

[[Page 612]]

value, and the $500 excess fair market value will not be counted.
    (6) In summary, each licensed vehicle shall be handled as follows: 
First, the vehicle shall be evaluated to determine if it is an income 
producer, a home, necessary to transport a disabled household member, or 
necessary to carry fuel for heating or water for home use. If not 
exempt, it will be evaluated to determine if its fair market value 
exceeds $4,500. If worth more than $4,500, the portion in excess of 
$4,500 for each vehicle will be counted as a resource. The vehicle will 
also be evaluated to see if it is equity exempt as the household's only 
vehicle or necessary for employment reasons. If not equity exempt, the 
equity value will be counted as a resource. If the vehicle has a 
countable market value of more than $4,500 and also has a countable 
equity value, only the greater of the two amounts shall be counted as a 
resource.
    (i) Transfer of resources. (1) At the time of application, 
households shall be asked to provide information regarding any resources 
which any household member (or ineligible alien or disqualified person 
whose resources are being considered available to the household) had 
transferred within the 3-month period immediately preceding the date of 
application. Households which have transferred resources knowingly for 
the purpose of qualifying or attempting to qualify for food stamp 
benefits shall be disqualified from participation in the program for up 
to 1 year from the date of the discovery of the transfer. This 
disqualification period shall be applied if the resources are 
transferred knowingly in the 3-month period prior to application or if 
they are transferred knowingly after the household is determined 
eligible for benefits. An example of the latter would be assets which 
the household acquires after being certified and which are then 
transferred to prevent the household from exceeding the maximum resource 
limit.
    (2) Eligibility for the program will not be affected by the 
following transfers:
    (i) Resources which would not otherwise affect eligibility, for 
example, resources consisting of excluded personal property such as 
furniture or of money that, when added to other nonexempt household 
resources, totaled less at the time of the transfer than the allowable 
resource limits;
    (ii) Resources which are sold or traded at, or near, fair market 
value;
    (iii) Resources which are transferred between members of the same 
household (including ineligible aliens or disqualified persons whose 
resources are being considered available to the household); and
    (iv) Resources which are transferred for reasons other than 
qualifying or attempting to qualify for food stamp benefits, for 
example, a parent placing funds into an educational trust fund described 
in paragraph (e)(9) of this section.
    (3) In the event the State agency establishes that an applicant 
household knowingly transferred resources for the purpose of qualifying 
or attempting to qualify for food stamp benefits, the household shall be 
sent a notice of denial explaining the reason for and length of the 
disqualification. The period of disqualification shall begin in the 
month of application. If the household is participating at the time of 
the discovery of the transfer, a notice of adverse action explaining the 
reason for and length of the disqualification shall be sent. The period 
of disqualification shall be made effective with the first allotment to 
be issued after the notice of adverse action period has expired, unless 
the household has requested a fair hearing and continued benefits.
    (4) The length of the disqualification period shall be based on the 
amount by which nonexempt transferred resources, when added to other 
countable resources, exceeds the allowable resource limits. The 
following chart will be used to determine the period of 
disqualification.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                            Period of   
        Amount in excess of the resource limit          disqualification
                                                            (months)    
------------------------------------------------------------------------
$0 to 249.99..........................................               1  
250 to 999.99.........................................               3  
1,000 to 2999.99......................................               6  
3,000 to 4,999.99.....................................               9  
5,000 or more.........................................              12  
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 613]]

    (j) Resources of nonhousehold members. (1) The resources of 
nonhousehold members, as defined in Sec. 273.1(b)(1), shall be handled 
as outlined in Sec. 273.11(d).
    (2) The resources of nonhousehold members, as defined in 
Sec. 273.1(b)(2), shall be handled as outlined in Sec. 273.11(c) and 
(d), as appropriate.

[Amdt. 132, 43 FR 47889, Oct. 17, 1978]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 273.8, 
see the List of CFR Sections Affected in the Finding Aids section of 
this volume.


<R05>
Sec. 273.9  Income and deductions.

    (a) Income eligibility standards. Participation in the Program shall 
be limited to those households whose incomes are determined to be a 
substantial limiting factor in permitting them to obtain a more 
nutritious diet. Households which contain an elderly or disabled member 
shall meet the net income eligiblity standards for the Food Stamp 
Program. Households which do not contain an elderly or disabled member 
shall meet both the net income eligibility standards and the gross 
income eligibility standards for the Food Stamp Program. Households 
which are categorically eligible as defined in Sec. 273.2(j)(2) or 
273.2(j)(4) do not have to meet either the gross or net income 
eligibility standards. The net and gross income eligibility standards 
shall be based on the Federal income poverty levels established as 
provided in section 673(2) of the Community Services Block Grant Act (42 
U.S.C. 9902(2)).
    (1) The gross income eligibility standards for the Food Stamp 
Program shall be as follows:
    (i) The income eligibility standards for the 48 contiguous States 
and the District of Columbia, Guam and the Virgin Islands shall be 130 
percent of the Federal income poverty levels for the 48 contiguous 
States and the District of Columbia.
    (ii) The income eligibility standards for Alaska shall be 130 
percent of the Federal income poverty levels for Alaska.
    (iii) The income eligibility standards for Hawaii shall be 130 
percent of the Federal income poverty levels for Hawaii.
    (2) The net income eligibility standards for the Food Stamp Program 
shall be as follows:
    (i) The income eligibility standards for the 48 contiguous States 
and the District of Columbia, Guam and the Virgin Islands shall be the 
Federal income poverty levels for the 48 contiguous States and the 
District of Columbia.
    (ii) The income eligibility standards for Alaska shall be the 
Federal income poverty levels for Alaska.
    (iii) The income eligibility standard for Hawaii shall be the 
Federal income poverty levels for Hawaii.
    (3) The income eligibility limits, as described in this paragraph, 
are revised each October 1 to reflect the annual adjustment to the 
Federal income poverty guidelines for the 48 States and the District of 
Columbia, for Alaska, and for Hawaii.
    (i) 130 percent of the annual income poverty guidelines shall be 
divided by 12 to determine the monthly gross income standards, rounding 
the results upwards as necessary. For households greater than eight 
persons, the increment in the Federal income poverty guidelines is 
multiplied by 130 percent, divided by 12, and the results rounded upward 
if necessary.
    (ii) The annual income poverty guidelines shall be divided by 12 to 
determine the monthly net income eligibility standards, rounding the 
results upward as necessary. For households greater than eight persons, 
the increment in the Federal income poverty guidelines is divided by 12, 
and the results rounded upward if necessary.
    (4) The monthly gross and net income eligibility standards for all 
areas will be prescribed in General Notices published in the Federal 
Register.
    (b) Definition of income. Household income shall mean all income 
from whatever source excluding only items specified in paragraph (c) of 
this section.
    (1) Earned income shall include: (i) All wages and salaries of an 
employee.
    (ii) The gross income from a self-employment enterprise, including 
the total gain from the sale of any capital goods or equipment related 
to the business, excluding the costs of doing business as provided in 
paragraph (c) of

[[Page 614]]

this section. Ownership of rental property shall be considered a self-
employment enterprise; however, income derived from the rental property 
shall be considered earned income only if a member of the household is 
actively engaged in the management of the property at least an average 
of 20 hours a week. Payments from a roomer or boarder, except foster 
care boarders, shall also be considered self-employment income.
    (iii) Training allowances from vocational and rehabilitative 
programs recognized by Federal, State, or local governments, such as the 
work incentive program, to the extent they are not a reimbursement. 
Training allowances under Job Training Partnership Act, other than 
earnings as specified in paragraph (b)(1)(v) of this section, are 
excluded from consideration as income.
    (iv) Payments under Title I (VISTA, University Year for Action, 
etc.) of the Domestic Volunteer Service Act of 1973 (Pub. L. 93-113 
Stat., as amended) shall be considered earned income and subject to the 
earned income deduction prescribed in Sec. 273.10(e)(1)(i)(B), excluding 
payments made to those households specified in paragraph (c)(10)(iii) of 
this section.
    (v) Earnings to individuals who are participating in on-the-job 
training programs under section 204(5), title II, of the Job Training 
Partnership Act. This provision does not apply to household members 
under 19 years of age who are under the parental control of another 
adult member, regardless of school attendance and/or enrollment as 
discussed in paragraph (c)(7) of this section. For the purpose of this 
provision, earnings include monies paid by the Job Training Partnership 
Act and monies paid by the employer.
    (vi) Educational assistance which has a work requirement (such as 
work study, an assistantship or fellowship with a work requirement) in 
excess of the amount excluded under Sec. 273.9(c)(3).
    (2) Unearned income shall include, but not be limited to:
    (i) Assistance payments from Federal or federally aided public 
assistance programs, such as supplemental security income (SSI) or aid 
to families with dependent children (AFDC); general assistance (GA) 
programs (as defined in Sec. 271.2); or other assistance programs based 
on need. Such assistance is considered to be unearned income even if 
provided in the form of a vendor payment (provided to a third party on 
behalf of the household), unless the vendor payment is specifically 
exempt from consideration as countable income under the provisions of 
paragraph (c)(1) of this section. Assistance payments from programs 
which require, as a condition of eligibility, the actual performance of 
work without compensation other than the assistance payments themselves, 
shall be considered unearned income.
    (ii) Annuities; pensions; retirement, veteran's, or disability 
benefits; worker's or unemployment compensation including any amounts 
deducted to repay claims for intentional program violations as provided 
in Sec. 272.12; old-age, survivors, or social security benefits; strike 
benefits; foster care payments for children or adults who are considered 
members of the household; gross income minus the cost of doing business 
derived from rental property in which a household member is not actively 
engaged in the management of the property at least 20 hours a week.
    (iii) Support or alimony payments made directly to the household 
from nonhousehold members.
    (iv) Scholarships, educational grants, deferred payment loans for 
education, veteran's educational benefits and the like, other than 
educational assistance with a work requirement, in excess of amounts 
excluded under Sec. 273.9(c).
    (v) Payments from Government-sponsored programs, dividends, 
interest, royalties, and all other direct money payments from any source 
which can be construed to be a gain or benefit.
    (vi) Monies which are withdrawn or dividends which are or could be 
received by a household from trust funds considered to be excludable 
resources under Sec. 273.8(e)(8). Such trust withdrawals shall be 
considered income in the month received, unless otherwise exempt under 
the provisions of paragraph (c) of this section. Dividends which the 
household has the option of either receiving as income or reinvesting in 
the trust are to be considered as income in the month they become 
available to the household unless otherwise exempt

[[Page 615]]

under the provisions of paragraph (c) of this section.
    (3) The earned or unearned income of an individual disqualified from 
the household for intentional Program violation, in accordance with 
Sec. 273.16, or as a result of a sanction imposed while he/she was 
participating in a household disqualified for failure to comply with 
workfare requirements, in accordance with Sec. 273.22, shall continue to 
be attributed in their entirety to the remaining household members. 
However, the earned or unearned income of individuals disqualified from 
households for failing to comply with the requirement to provide an SSN, 
in accordance with Sec. 273.6, or for being an ineligible alien, in 
accordance with Sec. 273.4, shall continue to be counted as income, less 
a pro rata share for the individual. Procedures for calculating this pro 
rata share are described in Sec. 273.11(c).
    (4) For households containing sponsored aliens (as defined in 
Sec. 273.11(j)(1)), unearned income shall also include that amount of 
the monthly income of an alien's sponsor and the sponsor's spouse (if 
living with the sponsor) that has been deemed to be that of the alien as 
unearned income in accordance with the procedures established in 
Sec. 273.11(j), unless the sponsored alien is otherwise exempt from this 
provision in accordance with Sec. 273.11(j). Actual money paid to the 
alien by the sponsor or the sponsor's spouse would not be considered 
income to the alien unless the amount paid exceeds the amount 
attributed. The amount paid that actually exceeds the amount attributed 
would be considered income to the alien in addition to the amount 
attributed to the alien.
    (5) Income shall not include the following:
    (i) Moneys withheld from an assistance payment, earned income, or 
other income source, or moneys received from any income source which are 
voluntarily or involuntarily returned, to repay a prior overpayment 
received from that income source, provided that the overpayment was not 
excludable under paragraph (c) of this section. However, moneys withheld 
from assistance from another program, as specified in Sec. 273.11(k), 
shall be included as income.
    (ii) Child support payments received by AFDC recipients which must 
be transferred to the agency administering title IV-D of the Social 
Security Act, as amended, to maintain AFDC eligibility.
    (c) Income exclusions. Only the following items shall be excluded 
from household income and no other income shall be excluded:
    (1) Any gain or benefit which is not in the form of money payable 
directly to the household, including in-kind benefits and certain vendor 
payments. In-kind benefits are those for which no monetary payment is 
made on behalf of the household and include meals, clothing, housing, or 
produce from a garden. A vendor payment is a money payment made on 
behalf of a household by a person or organization outside of the 
household directly to either the household's creditors or to a person or 
organization providing a service to the household. Payments made to a 
third party on behalf of the household are included or excluded as 
income as follows:
    (i) Public assistance (PA) vendor payments. PA vendor payments are 
counted as income unless they are made for:
    (A) Medical assistance;
    (B) Child care assistance;
    (C) Energy assistance as defined in paragraph (c)(11) of this 
section;
    (D) Emergency assistance (including, but not limited to housing and 
transportation payments) for migrant or seasonal farmworker households 
while they are in the job stream;
    (E) Housing assistance payments for households living in 
transitional housing for the homeless;
    (F) Emergency and special assistance. PA provided to a third party 
on behalf of a household which is not specifically excluded from 
consideration as income under the provisions of paragraphs (c)(1)(i)(A) 
through (c)(1)(i)(E) of this section shall be considered for exclusion 
under this provision. To be considered emergency or special assistance 
and excluded under this provision, the assistance must be provided over 
and above the normal PA grant or payment, or cannot normally be provided 
as part of such grant or payment. If the PA program is composed of 
various

[[Page 616]]

standards or components, the assistance would be considered over and 
above the normal grant or not part of the grant if the assistance is not 
included as a regular component of the PA grant or benefit or the amount 
of assistance exceeds the maximum rate of payment for the relevant 
component. If the PA program is not composed of various standards or 
components but is designed to provide a basic monthly grant or payment 
for all eligible households and provides a larger basic grant amount for 
all households in a particular category, e.g., all households with 
infants, the larger amount is still part of the normal grant or benefit 
for such households and not an ``extra'' payment excluded under this 
provision. On the other hand, if a fire destroyed a household item and a 
PA program provides an emergency amount paid directly to a store to 
purchase a replacement, such a payment is excluded under this provision. 
If the PA program is not composed of various standards, allowances, or 
components but is simply designed to provide assistance on an as-needed 
basis rather than to provide routine, regular monthly benefits to a 
client, no exclusion would be granted under this provision because the 
assistance is not provided over and above the normal grant, it is the 
normal grant. If it is not clear whether a certain type of PA vendor 
payment is covered under this provision, the State agency shall apply to 
the appropriate FCS Regional Office for a determination of whether the 
PA vendor payments should be excluded. The application for this 
exclusion determination must explain the emergency or special nature of 
the vendor payment, the exact type of assistance it is intended to 
provide, who is eligible for the assistance, how the assistance is paid, 
and how the vendor payment fits into the overall PA benefit standard. A 
copy of the rules, ordinances, or statutes which create and authorize 
the program shall accompany the application request.
    (ii) General assistance (GA) vendor payments. Vendor payments made 
under a State or local GA program or a comparable basic assistance 
program are excluded from income except for some vendor payments for 
housing. A housing vendor payment is counted as income unless the 
payment is for:
    (A) Assistance provided for utility costs;
    (B) Energy assistance (as defined in paragraph (c)(11) of this 
section);
    (C) Housing assistance from a State or local housing authority;
    (D) Emergency assistance for migrant or seasonal farmworker 
households while they are in the job stream;
    (E) Housing assistance for households living in transitional housing 
for the homeless;
    (F) Emergency or special payments (as defined in paragraph 
(c)(1)(i)(F) of this section; or
    (G) Assistance provided under a program in a State in which no GA 
payments may be made directly to the household in the form of cash.
    (iii) Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) vendor 
payments. Rent or mortgage payments made to landlords or mortgagees by 
HUD are excluded.
    (iv) Educational assistance vendor payments. Educational assistance 
provided to a third party on behalf of the household for living expenses 
shall be treated the same as educational assistance payable directly to 
the household.
    (v) Vendor payments that are reimbursements. Reimbursements made in 
the form of vendor payments are excluded on the same basis as 
reimbursements paid directly to the household in accordance with 
paragraph (c)(5) of this section.
    (vi) Demonstration project vendor payments. In-kind or vendor 
payments which would normally be excluded as income but are converted in 
whole or in part to a direct cash payment under a federally authorized 
demonstration project or waiver of provisions of Federal law shall be 
excluded from income.
    (vii) Other third-party payments. Other third-party payments shall 
be handled as follows: moneys legally obligated and otherwise payable to 
the household which are diverted by the provider of the payment to a 
third party for a household expense shall be counted as income and not 
excluded. If a person or organization makes a payment to a third party 
on behalf of a household using funds that are not owed to the

[[Page 617]]

household, the payment shall be excluded from income. This distinction 
is illustrated by the following examples:
    (A) A friend or relative uses his or her own money to pay the 
household's rent directly to the landlord. This vendor payment shall be 
excluded.
    (B) A household member earns wages. However, the wages are garnished 
or diverted by the employer and paid to a third party for a household 
expense, such as rent. This vendor payment is counted as income. 
However, if the employer pays a household's rent directly to the 
landlord in addition to paying the household its regular wages, the rent 
payment shall be excluded from income. Similarly, if the employer 
provides housing to an employee in addition to wages, the value of the 
housing shall not be counted as income.
    (C) A household receives court-ordered monthly support payments in 
the amount of $400. Later, $200 is diverted by the provider and paid 
directly to a creditor for a household expense. The payment is counted 
as income. Money deducted or diverted from a court-ordered support or 
alimony payment (or other binding written support or alimony agreement) 
to a third party for a household's expense shall be included as income 
because the payment is taken from money that is owed to the household. 
However, payments specified by a court order or other legally binding 
agreement to go directly to a third party rather than the household are 
excluded from income because they are not otherwise payable to the 
household. For example, a court awards support payments in the amount of 
$400 a month and in addition orders $200 to be paid directly to a bank 
for repayment of a loan. The $400 payment is counted as income and the 
$200 payment is excluded from income. Support payments not required by a 
court order or other legally binding agreement (including payments in 
excess of the amount specified in a court order or written agreement) 
which are paid to a third party on the household's behalf shall be 
excluded from income.
    (2) Any income in the certification period which is received too 
infrequently or irregularly to be reasonably anticipated, but not in 
excess of $30 in a quarter.
    (3)(i) Educational assistance, including grants, scholarships, 
fellowships, work study, educational loans on which payment is deferred, 
veterans' educational benefits and the like.
    (ii) To be excluded, educational assistance referred to in paragraph 
(c)(3)(i) must be:
    (A) Awarded to a household member enrolled at a:
    (1) Recognized institution of post-secondary education (meaning any 
public or private educational institution which normally requires a high 
school diploma or equivalency certificate for enrollment or admits 
persons who are beyond the age of compulsory school attendance in the 
State in which the institution is located, provided that the institution 
is legally authorized or recognized by the State to provide an 
educational program beyond secondary education in the State or provides 
a program of training to prepare students for gainful employment, 
including correspondence schools at that level),
    (2) School for the handicapped,
    (3) Vocational education program,
    (4) Vocational or technical school,
    (5) Program that provides for obtaining a secondary school diploma 
or the equivalent;
    (B) Used for or identified (earmarked) by the institution, school, 
program, or other grantor for the following allowable expenses:
    (1) Tuition,
    (2) Mandatory school fees, including the rental or purchase of any 
equipment, material, and supplies related to the pursuit of the course 
of study involved,
    (3) Books,
    (4) Supplies,
    (5) Transportation,
    (6) Miscellaneous personal expenses, other than normal living 
expenses, of the student incidental to attending a school, institution 
or program,
    (7) Dependent care,
    (8) Origination fees and insurance premiums on educational loans,
    (9) Normal living expenses which are room and board are not 
excludable.
    (10) Amounts excluded for dependent care costs shall not also be 
excluded under the general exclusion provisions

[[Page 618]]

of paragraph Sec. 273.9(c)(5)(i)(C). Dependent care costs which exceed 
the amount excludable from income shall be deducted from income in 
accordance with paragraph Sec. 273.9(d)(4) and be subject to a cap.
    (iii) Exclusions based on use pursuant to paragraph (c)(3)(ii)(B) 
must be incurred or anticipated for the period the educational income is 
intended to cover regardless of when the educational income is actually 
received. If a student uses other income sources to pay for allowable 
educational expenses in months before the educational income is 
received, the exclusions to cover the expenses shall be allowed when the 
educational income is received. When the amounts used for allowable 
expense are more than amounts earmarked by the institution, school, 
program or other grantor, an exclusion shall be allowed for amounts used 
over the earmarked amounts. Exclusions based on use shall be subtracted 
from unearned educational income to the extent possible. If the unearned 
educational income is not enough to cover the expense, the remainder of 
the allowable expense shall be excluded from earned educational income.
    (iv) An individual's total educational income exclusions granted 
under the provisions of paragraph (c)(3)(i) through (c)(3)(iii) of this 
section cannot exceed that individual's total educational income which 
was subject to the provisions of paragraph (c)(3)(i) through (c)(3)(iii) 
of this section.
    (4) All loans, including loans from private individuals as well as 
commercial institutions, other than educational loans on which repayment 
is deferred. Educational loans on which repayment is deferred shall be 
excluded pursuant to the provisions of Sec. 273.9(c)(3)(i). A loan on 
which repayment must begin within 60 days after receipt of the loan 
shall not be considered a deferred repayment loan.
    (5) Reimbursements for past or future expenses, to the extent they 
do not exceed actual expenses, and do not represent a gain or benefit to 
the household. Reimbursements for normal household living expenses such 
as rent or mortgage, personal clothing, or food eaten at home are a gain 
or benefit and, therefore, are not excluded. To be excluded, these 
payments must be provided specifically for an identified expense, other 
than normal living expenses, and used for the purpose intended. When a 
reimbursement, including a flat allowance, covers multiple expenses, 
each expense does not have to be separately identified as long as none 
of the reimbursement covers normal living expenses. The amount by which 
a reimbursement exceeds the actual incurred expense shall be counted as 
income. However, reimbursements shall not be considered to exceed actual 
expenses, unless the provider or the household indicates the amount is 
excessive.
    (i) Examples of excludable reimbursements which are not considered 
to be a gain or benefit to the household are:
    (A) Reimbursements or flat allowances, including reimbursements made 
to the household under Sec. 273.7(d)(1)(ii), for job- or training-
related expenses such as travel, per diem, uniforms, and transportation 
to and from the job or training site. Reimbursements which are provided 
over and above the basic wages for these expenses are excluded; however, 
these expenses, if not reimbursed, are not otherwise deductible. 
Reimbursements for the travel expenses incurred by migrant workers are 
also excluded.
    (B) Reimbursements for out-of-pocket expenses of volunteers incurred 
in the course of their work.
    (C) Medical or dependent care reimbursements.
    (D) Reimbursements received by households to pay for services 
provided by Title XX of the Social Security Act.
    (E) Any allowance a State agency provides no more frequently than 
annually for children's clothes when the children enter or return to 
school or daycare, provided the State agency does not reduce the monthly 
AFDC payment for the month in which the school clothes allowance is 
provided. State agencies are not required to verify attendance at school 
or daycare.
    (F) Reimbursements made to the household under Sec. 273.7(d)(1)(ii) 
for expenses necessary for participation in an education component under 
the E&T program.

[[Page 619]]

    (ii) The following shall not be considered a reimbursement 
excludable under this provision:
    (A) No portion of benefits provided under title IV-A of the Social 
Security Act, to the extent such benefits are attributed to an 
adjustment for work-related or child care expenses (except for payments 
or reimbursements for such expenses made under an employment, education 
or training program initiated under such title after September 19, 
l988), shall be considered excludable under this provision.
    (B) No portion of any educational assistance that is provided for 
normal living expenses (room and board) shall be considered a 
reimbursement excludable under this provision.
    (6) Moneys received and used for the care and maintenance of a 
third-party beneficiary who is not a household member. If the intended 
beneficiaries of a single payment are both household and nonhousehold 
members, any identifiable portion of the payment intended and used for 
the care and maintenance of the nonhousehold member shall be excluded. 
If the nonhousehold member's portion cannot be readily identified, the 
payment shall be evenly prorated among intended beneficiaries and the 
exclusion applied to the nonhousehold member's pro rata share or the 
amount actually used for the nonhousehold member's care and maintenance, 
whichever is less.
    (7) The earned income (as defined in paragraph (b)(1) of this 
section) of any household member who is under age 22, who is an 
elementary or secondary school student, and who lives with a natural, 
adoptive, or stepparent or under the parental control of a household 
member other than a parent. For purposes of this provision, an 
elementary or secondary school student is someone who attends elementary 
or secondary school, or who attends classes to obtain a General 
Equivalency Diploma that are recognized, operated, or supervised by the 
student's state or local school district, or who attends elementary or 
secondary classes through a home-school program recognized or supervised 
by the student's state or local school district. The exclusion shall 
continue to apply during temporary interruptions in school attendance 
due to semester or vacation breaks, provided the child's enrollment will 
resume following the break. If the child's earnings or amount of work 
performed cannot be differentiated from that of other household members, 
the total earnings shall be prorated equally among the working members 
and the child's pro rata share excluded.
    (8) Money received in the form of a nonrecurring lump-sum payment, 
including, but not limited to, income tax refunds, rebates, or credits; 
retroactive lump-sum social security, SSI, public assistance, railroad 
retirement benefits, or other payments; lump-sum insurance settlements; 
or refunds of security deposits on rental property or utilities. These 
payments shall be counted as resources in the month received, in 
accordance with Sec. 273.8(c) unless specifically excluded from 
consideration as a resource by other Federal laws.
    (9) The cost of producing self-employment income. The procedures for 
computing the cost of producing self-employment income are described in 
Sec. 273.11.
    (10) Any income that is specifically excluded by any other Federal 
statute from consideration as income for the purpose of determining 
eligibility for the food stamp program. The following laws provide such 
an exclusion:
    (i) Reimbursements from the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real 
Property Acquisition Policy Act of 1970 (Pub. L. 91-646, section 216).
    (ii) Payments received under the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act 
(Pub. L. 92-203, section 21(a));
    (iii) Any payment to volunteers under Title II (RSVP, Foster 
Grandparents and others) of the Domestic Volunteer Services Act of 1973 
(Pub. L. 93-113) as amended. Payments under title I of that Act 
(including payments from such title I programs as VISTA, University Year 
for Action, and Urban Crime Prevention Program) to volunteers shall be 
excluded for those individuals receiving food stamps or public 
assistance at the time they joined the title I program, except that 
households which were receiving an income exclusion for a Vista or other 
title I Subsistence allowance at the time of conversion to the Food 
Stamp Act of 1977

[[Page 620]]

shall continue to receive an income exclusion for VISTA for the length 
of their volunteer contract in effect at the time of conversion. 
Temporary interruptions in food stamp participation shall not alter the 
exclusion once an initial determination has been made. New applicants 
who were not receiving public assistance or food stamps at the time they 
joined VISTA shall have these volunteer payments included as earned 
income. The FCS National Office shall keep FCS Regional Offices informed 
of any new programs created under title I and II or changes in programs 
mentioned above so that they may alert State agencies.
    (iv) Income derived from certain submarginal land of the United 
States which is held in trust for certain Indian tribes (Pub. L. 94-114, 
section 6).
    (v) Allowances, earnings, or payments (including reimbursements) to 
individuals participating in programs under the Job Training Partnership 
Act (Pub. L. 90-300), except as provided for under paragraph (b)(1)(v) 
of this section.
    (vi) Income derived from the disposition of funds to the Grand River 
Band of Ottawa Indians (Pub. L. 94-540).
    (vii) Earned income tax credits received as a result of Pub. L. 95-
600, the Revenue Act of 1978 which are received before January 1, 1980.
    (viii) Payments by the Indian Claims Commission to the Confederated 
Tribes and Bands of the Yakima Indian Nation or the Apache Tribe of the 
Mescalero Reservation (Pub. L. 95-433).
    (ix) Payments to the Passamaquoddy Tribe and the Penobscot Nation or 
any of their members received pursuant to the Maine Indian Claims 
Settlement Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-420, section 5).
    (x) Payments of relocation assistance to members of the Navajo and 
Hopi Tribes under Pub. L. 93-531.
    (11) Payments or allowances made for the purpose of providing energy 
assistance under any Federal law, including utility reimbursements made 
by the Department of Housing and Urban Development and the Farmers Home 
Administration. In addition, any payments or allowances, including tax 
credits, under State or local law which are so designated and made for 
the purpose of providing energy assistance shall be excluded from 
consideration as income, provided that FCS has approved the exclusion of 
such payments or allowances. Notification of FCS approval will contain a 
specific date on which it becomes effective, but in no case will that 
date be later than 30 days following FCS notification to the State 
agency. The payments shall include but not be limited to assistance 
which is combined in a single payment with public assistance (PA) or 
general assistance (GA). The State agency shall submit documentation to 
FCS to show that the State or local energy assistance to be excluded 
meets the purpose designation as follows:
    (i) The State or local payments or allowances are made for the 
purpose of providing energy assistance to households. Some indicators of 
purpose are:
    (A) The energy assistance is not limited to households which receive 
PA or GA;
    (B) The energy assistance is provided only to households which 
actually incur home energy costs;
    (C) If the energy assistance payments are made separately or 
combined with other assistance payments, such as PA or GA, the energy 
assistance results in an increase in total assistance to the household 
(not counting food stamps) when compared to the assistance level as of 
the first day of the State or local legislative session during which the 
energy assistance is authorized or increased;
    (D) The energy assistance is based on studies, surveys, or reports 
evaluating home energy costs. The energy assistance levels should be 
directly tied to the findings of such studies, surveys, or reports; and
    (E) The energy assistance payments are designated as such by the 
legislative body enacting them;
    (ii) The payments or allowances are clearly designated, (A) in State 
or local law, or (B) in documentation supporting or accompanying the 
statute, as energy assistance, distinct from other assistance. If the 
designation is contained only in supporting documentation it must 
clearly reflect the intent of both chambers of a bicameral legislature 
or the intent of a majority of members of a town council or county 
board. Documentation that would show

[[Page 621]]

a majority intent of an enacting body could take the form of a 
legislative resolution, the preamble and body of county regulations, 
county or town ordinances, or similar measures that represent the wishes 
of an entire legislative body; and
    (iii) The levels of State or local energy assistance payments or 
allowances are calculated based on the seasonal home energy needs of 
typical households over an aggregate period not exceeding six months per 
year. If the State or local energy assistance is actually provided over 
a period longer than this aggregate, then the State agency shall 
document the reasons why it is administratively infeasible or 
impracticable to provide the energy assistance within the aggregate 
period on which it is based. If the legislation enacting the energy 
assistance program requires calculation of the energy assistance 
payments on the basis of only increased seasonal home energy needs, such 
payments may be excluded.
    (12) At State agency option, the State agency may exclude from 
unearned income, up to $50 monthly of title IV-D child support payments 
in cases where such payments are received by households from the title 
IV-D support agency responsible for collecting such child support 
payments on behalf of AFDC recipients. The exclusion must be uniformly 
applied to all affected households.
    (13) Cash donations based on need received on or after February 1, 
1988 from one or more private nonprofit charitable organizations, but 
not to exceed $300 in a Federal fiscal year quarter.
    (14) Earned income tax credit payments received either as a lump sum 
or payments under section 3507 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 
(relating to advance payment of earned income tax credits received as 
part of the paycheck or as a reduction in taxes that otherwise would 
have been paid at the end of the year).
    (15) Any payment made to an E&T participant under 
Sec. 273.7(d)(1)(ii) for costs that are reasonably necessary and 
directly related to participation in the E&T program. These costs 
include, but are not limited to, dependent care costs, transportation, 
other expenses related to work, training or education, such as uniforms, 
personal safety items or other necessary equipment, and books or 
training manuals. These costs shall not include the cost of meals away 
from home. Also, the value of any dependent care services provided for 
or arranged under Sec. 273.7(d)(1)(ii)(A) would be excluded.
    (16) Governmental foster care payments received by households with 
foster care individuals who are considered to be boarders in accordance 
with Sec. 273.1(c).
    (17) Income of an SSI recipient necessary for the fulfillment of a 
plan for achieving self-support (PASS) which has been approved under 
section 1612(b)(4)(A)(iii) or 1612(b)(4)(B)(iv) of the Social Security 
Act. This income may be spent in accordance with an approved PASS or 
deposited into a PASS savings account for future use.
    (d) Income deductions. Deductions shall be allowed only for the 
following household expenses:
    (1) Standard deduction. The per household per month standard 
deduction amounts applicable for use in the 48 contiguous States and the 
District of Columbia, and the amounts applicable for Alaska, Hawaii, 
Guam, and the Virgin Islands are adjusted annually and will be 
prescribed in General Notices published in the Federal Register.
    (2) Earned income deduction. Twenty percent of gross earned income 
as defined in paragraph (b)(1) of this section. Earnings excluded in 
paragraph (c) of this section shall not be included in gross earned 
income for purposes of computing the earned income deduction.
    (3) Excess medical deduction. That portion of medical expenses in 
excess of $35 per month, excluding special diets, incurred by any 
household member who is elderly or disabled as defined in Sec. 271.2. 
Spouses or other persons receiving benfits as a dependent of the SSI or 
disability and blindness recipient are not eligible to receive this 
deduction but persons receiving emergency SSI benefits based on 
presumptive eligibility are eligible for this deduction. Allowable 
medical costs are:
    (i) Medical and dental care including psychotherapy and 
rehabilitation services provided by a licensed practitioner

[[Page 622]]

authorized by State law or other qualified health professional.
    (ii) Hospitalization or outpatient treatment, nursing care, and 
nursing home care including payments by the household for an individual 
who was a household member immediately prior to entering a hospital or 
nursing home provided by a facility recognized by the State.
    (iii) Prescription drugs when prescribed by a licensed practitioner 
authorized under State law and other over-the-counter medication 
(including insulin) when approved by a licensed practitioner or other 
qualified health professional; in addition, costs of medical supplies, 
sick-room equipment (including rental) or other prescribed equipment are 
deductible;
    (iv) Health and hospitalization insurance policy premiums. The costs 
of health and accident policies such as those payable in lump sum 
settlements for death or dismemberment or income maintenance policies 
such as those that continue mortgage or loan payments while the 
beneficiary is disabled are not deductible;
    (v) Medicare premiums related to coverage under Title XVIII of the 
Social Security Act; any cost-sharing or spend down expenses incurred by 
Medicaid recipients;
    (vi) Dentures, hearing aids, and prosthetics;
    (vii) Securing and maintaining a seeing eye or hearing dog including 
the cost of dog food and veterinarian bills;
    (viii) Eye glasses prescribed by a physician skilled in eye disease 
or by an optometrist;
    (ix) Reasonable cost of transportation and lodging to obtain medical 
treatment or services;
    (x) Maintaining an attendant, homemaker, home health aide, or child 
care services, housekeeper, necessary due to age, infirmity, or illness. 
In addition, an amount equal to the one person coupon allotment shall be 
deducted if the household furnishes the majority of the attendant's 
meals. The allotment for this meal related deduction shall be that in 
effect at the time of initial certification. The State agency is only 
required to update the allotment amount at the next scheduled 
recertification; however, at their option, the State agency may do so 
earlier. If a household incurs attendant care costs that could qualify 
under both the medical deduction and dependent care deduction, the State 
agency shall treat the cost as a medical expense.
    (4) Dependent care. Payments for the actual costs for the care of 
children or other dependents when necessary for a household member to 
accept or continue employment, comply with the employment and training 
requirements as specified under Sec. 273.7(f), or attend training or 
pursue education which is preparatory to employment, except as provided 
in Sec. 273.10(d)(1)(i). The maximum monthly dependent care deduction 
amount households shall be granted under this provision is $200 a month 
for each dependent child under two (2) years of age and $175 a month for 
each other dependent.
    (5) Shelter costs--(i) Homeless households. State agencies shall use 
a standard estimate of the shelter expenses for households in which all 
members are homeless and are not receiving free shelter throughout the 
month. If State agencies opt to develop their own estimate, the estimate 
must be consistent with costs incurred by homeless people for shelter 
and the methodology and database used in developing the State estimate 
shall be submitted to FCS for approval. If a State agency finds that 
area shelter costs differ by geographic areas, the State agency may 
develop specific estimates by geographic areas. If a State agency 
submits data that show shelter costs for most homeless households are 
higher than the FCS shelter estimate, the higher shelter estimate shall 
be used. If State agencies do not wish to develop their own estimate, 
then the State agency shall use the estimate provided by the Department. 
The Department's shelter estimate for FY 92 is $128. The Department will 
update this figure annually when the shelter cap is adjusted using the 
same method as is used in indexing the shelter cap. All homeless 
households which incur or reasonably expect to incur shelter costs 
during a month shall be eligible for the estimate unless higher shelter 
costs are verified in accordance with Sec. 273.2(f)(1)(xi) of this 
chapter at which point, the household may use actual shelter costs 
rather

[[Page 623]]

than the estimate. Homeless households which incur no shelter costs 
during the month shall not be eligible for the standard estimate.
    (ii) Household shelter deduction. Monthly shelter costs in excess of 
50 percent of the household's income after all other deductions in 
paragraphs (d)(1), (2), (3) and (4) of this section have been allowed. 
The shelter deduction shall not exceed the maximum limit established for 
the area. This is applicable unless the household contains a member who 
is elderly or disabled as defined in Sec. 271.2. Such households shall 
receive an excess shelter deduction for the monthly cost that exceeds 50 
percent of the household's monthly income after all other applicable 
deductions. The shelter deduction amount applicable for use in the 48 
contiguous States and the District of Columbia, and the amounts 
applicable for use in Alaska, Hawaii, Guam, and the Virgin Islands are 
adjusted annually and will be prescribed in General Notices published in 
the Federal Register. Shelter costs shall include only the following:
    (A) Continuing charges for the shelter occupied by the household, 
including rent, mortgage, or other continuing charges leading to the 
ownership of the shelter such as loan repayments for the purchase of a 
mobile home, including interest on such payments.
    (B) Property taxes, State and local assessments, and insurance on 
the structure itself, but not separate costs for insuring furniture or 
personal belongings.
    (C) The cost of heating and cooking fuel; cooling and electricity; 
water and sewerage; garbage and trash collection fees; the basic service 
fee for one telephone, including tax on the basic fee; and fees charged 
by the utility provider for initial installation of the utility. One-
time deposits shall not be included as shelter costs.
    (D) The shelter costs for the home if temporarily not occupied by 
the household because of employment or training away from home, illness, 
or abandonment caused by a natural disaster or casualty loss. For costs 
of a home vacated by the household to be included in the household's 
shelter costs, the household must intend to return to the home; the 
current occupants of the home, if any, must not be claiming the shelter 
costs for food stamp purposes; and the home must not be leased or rented 
during the absence of the household.
    (E) Charges for the repair of the home which was substantially 
damaged or destroyed due to a natural disaster such as a fire or flood. 
Shelter costs shall not include charges for repair of the home that have 
been or will be reimbursed by private or public relief agencies, 
insurance companies, or from any other source.
    (6) Standard utility allowance. (i) The State agency may elect to 
offer a standard utility allowance to households for use in calculating 
shelter costs. The State agency may establish either:
    (A) A separate standard utility allowance for individual utility 
expenses defined in paragraph (d)(5)(ii)(C) of this section;
    (B) A single standard utility allowance which includes a heating or 
cooling component and which is available to all households which incur 
out-of-pocket heating or cooling expenses; or
    (C) Two single standard utility allowances which include a heating 
or cooling component.

If the State agency chooses to develop two standard utility allowances 
for households which incur heating or cooling expenses, one standard 
shall only be used for those households which receive indirect energy 
assistance payments other than payments under the Low Income Home Energy 
Assistance Act of 1981, and the second standard shall be used for all 
other households. A cooling cost is a verifiable utility expense 
relating to the operation of air conditioning systems or room air 
conditioners.
    (ii) The standard utility allowance which includes a heating or 
cooling component shall be made available only to households which incur 
heating and cooling costs separately and apart from their rent or 
mortgage. These households include:
    (A) Residents of rental housing who are billed on a monthly basis by 
their landlords for actual usage as determined through individual 
metering;

[[Page 624]]

    (B) Recipients of energy assistance payments made under the Low 
Income Home Energy Assistance Act of 1981; or
    (C) Recipients of indirect energy assistance payments, made under a 
program other than the Low Income Home Energy Assistance Act of 1981, 
who continue to incur out-of-pocket heating or cooling expenses in 
accordance with Sec. 273.10(d)(6) during any month covered by the 
certification period.

To be qualified, the household must be billed on a regular basis for its 
heating or cooling costs. A household which incurs cooling or heating 
fuel costs on an irregular basis but is otherwise eligible to use the 
standard allowance may continue to use the allowance between billing 
periods. A household which lives in a public housing unit or other 
rental housing unit which has central utility meters and charges the 
household only for excess heating or cooling costs shall not be 
permitted to use the standard utility allowance which includes a heating 
or cooling cost component. If a household is not entitled to the 
standard utility allowance, it may claim the actual utility expenses 
(for any utility identified in paragraph (d)(5)(ii)(C) of this section) 
which it does pay separately.
    (iii) The State agency may elect to develop either an annualized 
standard utility allowance or seasonal standard utility allowances. If 
the State agency elects to use a single annualized standard utility 
allowance it will not be required to seasonally adjust the budgets of 
qualified households which incur either heating or cooling costs. If the 
State agency elects to vary the allowance seasonally it shall ensure 
that during the heating season the allowance is provided only to 
households with heating costs, and that during the cooling season the 
allowance is provided only to households with cooling costs.
    (iv) State agencies shall develop methodologies, subject to FCS 
approval, to be followed in establishing their standard utility 
allowances. The standard allowance(s) developed by the State agency 
shall be submitted to FCS for approval.
    (v) The State agency may establish standard utility allowances as 
prescribed in paragraph (d)(6)(i) of this section.
    (A) If the State agency establishes separate standard allowances, 
households which do not qualify for the standard allowance for heating 
and cooling costs may be allowed to use the other standard allowances.
    (B) If the State agency establishes one or two single standard 
allowances, it shall include the cost of heating and/or cooling, cooking 
fuel, electricity not used to heat or cool the residence, the basic 
service fee for one telephone, water, sewerage, and garbage and trash 
collection. If the State agency elects to develop a single standard for 
those households which receive indirect energy assistance payments, as 
provided for in paragraph (d)(6)(i) of this section, the standard shall 
reflect the average out-of-pocket heating or cooling expense for such 
households.
    (C) The State agency may develop a method, subject to FCS approval, 
for calculating a mandatory telephone allowance for use in conjunction 
with a single utility allowance or as the standard allowance for the 
telephone if the State has separate standard allowances by utility. In 
States with a single utility allowance, the telephone allowance would 
apply to households which are not entitled to claim the overall 
standard, but which, nonetheless, incur separate telephone expenses. The 
State agency may mandate use of the telephone allowance even if actual 
telephone costs are higher.
    (vi) The State agency shall review and adjust the standard utility 
allowance(s) annually to reflect changes in the cost of utilities. The 
State agency may use data gathered through quality control sampling, 
surveys of utility company rates, or other methods for updating the 
standard utility allowance(s). The State agency may vary the size of the 
standard utility allowance to reflect differences such as seasonal cost 
changes or cost variations between geographical areas.
    (vii) At the time of certification the household shall be advised 
that it may deduct its actual utility costs rather than the standard 
allowances (except as provided in paragraph (d)(6)(v)(C) of this section 
for a telephone standard) throughout the certification period if

[[Page 625]]

the household can verify these costs. The State agency shall further 
advise the household when it has the right to switch between the use of 
actual utility costs and the standard utility allowance. The State 
agency shall permit the household to switch between actual utility costs 
and the standard utility allowance at the time of recertification and 
one additional time during each twelve-month period.
    (viii) If the household shares utility expenses with, and lives 
with, another individual not participating in the Food Stamp Program, 
another household participating in the Food Stamp Program, or both, the 
allowance shall be prorated among the household and the other 
individual, household, or both, Provided, That the State agency may, if 
it is unable to accurately determine the prorata share of utility costs 
paid by the parties, use the actual utility costs paid by each 
household. Under no circumstances shall the total amount of utility 
costs used to determine the amount of the deduction exceed the total 
amount of actual utility costs for the residence.
    (7) Child support deduction. Legally obligated child support 
payments paid by a household member to or for a nonhousehold member, 
including payments made to a third party on behalf of the nonhousehold 
member (vendor payments). The State agency shall allow a deduction for 
amounts paid toward arrearages. Alimony payments made to or for a 
nonhousehold member shall not be included in the child support 
deduction.
    (8) Adjustment of standard deduction. (i) Effective October 1, 1987, 
and each October 1 thereafter, the standard deduction shall be adjusted 
to reflect change in the CPI-U for items other than food for the twelve 
months ending the preceding June 30.
    (ii) These adjustments shall be based on the previous unrounded 
numbers, and the result rounded down to the nearest lower dollar 
increment.
    (9) Adjustment of shelter deduction.
    (i) Effective October 1, 1987, for households whose certification 
period begins on or after October 1, 1987, the maximum monthly excess 
shelter expense deduction limits shall be $164 for the 48 States and DC, 
$285 for Alaska, $234 for Hawaii, $199 for Guam, and $121 for the Virgin 
Islands. Effective October 1, 1987, for households whose certification 
period began before October 1, 1987, the maximum monthly excess shelter 
deduction limits shall be $152 for the 48 States and DC, $261 for 
Alaska, $217 for Hawaii, $185 for Guam, and $112 for the Virgin Islands. 
Households whose certification period began before October 1, 1987 shall 
receive the higher deduction limits stated in this paragraph beginning 
with the first month of the certification period for which such 
households are recertified after October 1, 1987. Effective October 1, 
1988, and each October 1 thereafter, the maximum limit for excess 
shelter expense deductions shall be adjusted to reflect changes in the 
shelter, fuel, and utilities components of housing costs in the CPI-U 
for the twelve months ending the preceding June 30.
    (ii) These adjustments shall be based on the previous unrounded 
numbers, and the result rounded down to the nearest lower dollar 
increment.

[Amdt. 132, 43 FR 47889, Oct. 17, 1978]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 273.9, 
see the List of CFR Sections Affected in the Finding Aids section of 
this volume.


<R05>
Sec. 273.10  Determining household eligibility and benefit levels.

    (a) Month of application--(1) Determination of eligibility and 
benefit levels. (i) A household's eligibility shall be determined for 
the month of application by considering the household's circumstances 
for the entire month of application. Most households will have the 
eligibility determination based on circumstances for the entire calendar 
month in which the household filed its application. However, State 
agencies may, with the prior approval of FCS, use a fiscal month if the 
State agency determines that it is more efficient and satisfies FCS that 
the accounting procedures fully comply with certification and issuance 
requirements contained in these regulations. A State agency may elect to 
use either a standard fiscal month for all households, such as from the 
15th of one calendar month to the 15th of the next calendar month, or a 
fiscal month that will vary for each

[[Page 626]]

household depending on the date an individual files an application for 
the Program. Applicant households consisting of residents of a public 
institution who apply jointly for SSI and food stamps prior to release 
from the public institution in accordance with Sec. 273.1(e)(2) will 
have their eligibility determined for the month in which the applicant 
household was released from the institution.
    (ii) A household's benefit level for the initial months of 
certification shall be based on the day of the month it applies for 
benefits and the household shall receive benefits from the date of 
application to the end of the month unless the applicant household 
consists of residents of a public institution. For households which 
apply for SSI prior to their release from a public institution in 
accordance with Sec. 273.1(e)(2), the benefit level for the initial 
month of certification shall be based on the date of the month the 
household is released from the institution and the household shall 
receive benefits from the date of the household's release from the 
institution to the end of the month. As used in this section, the term 
initial month means the first month for which the household is certified 
for participation in the Food Stamp Program following any period of more 
than one month, fiscal or calendar depending on the State's issuance 
cycle, during which the household was not certified for participation. 
For purposes of this provision, a household is not considered to be the 
same household as the previously participating household if the 
certification worker has established a new food stamp case for the 
household because of a significant change in the membership of the 
previously participating household. Recertification shall be processed 
in accordance with Sec. 273.10(a)(2). The State agency shall prorate a 
household's benefits according to one of the two following options:
    (A) The State agency shall use a standard 30-day calendar or fiscal 
month. A household applying on the 31st of a month will be treated as 
though it applied on the 30th of the month.
    (B) The State agency shall prorate benefits over the exact length of 
a particular calendar or fiscal month.
    (iii) To determine the amount of the prorated allotment, the State 
agency shall use either the appropriate Food Stamp Allotment Proration 
Table provided by FCS or whichever of the following formulae is 
appropriate:
    (A) For State agencies which use a standard 30-day calendar or 
fiscal month the formula is as follows, keeping in mind that the date of 
application for someone applying on the 31st of a month is the 30th:

                                                                    (31-date of application)                    
                                  full month's benefits  x           ----------------------      = allotment    
                                                                               30                               
                                                                                                                


                                                                               (number of days in month+1-date of application)                          
                                           full month's benefits  x                  ----------------------------------            = allotment          
                                                                                           number of days in month                                      
                                                                                                                                                        

    (C) If after using the appropriate formula the result ends in 1 
through 99 cents, the State agency shall round the product down to the 
nearest lower whole dollar. If the computation results in an allotment 
of less than $10, then no issuance shall be made for the initial month.
    (iv) Those households which are entitled to expedited service as 
defined in Sec. 273.2(i)(1), and which apply for benefits after the 15th 
of the month, shall be assigned certification periods in accordance with 
Sec. 273.2(i)(4)(iii). However, the benefits for the second full month 
following the month of application shall not be issued until all 
necessary verification not already provided has been provided to the 
State agency.

[[Page 627]]

    (2) Application for recertification. Eligibility for recertification 
shall be determined based on circumstances anticipated for the 
certification period starting the month following the expiration of the 
current certification period. The level of benefits for recertifications 
shall be based on the same anticipated circumstances, except for 
retrospectively budgeted households which shall be recertified in 
accordance with Sec. 273.21(f)(2). If an application for recertification 
is submitted more than one month after the household's certification 
period has expired, that application shall be considered an initial 
application and benefits for that month shall be prorated in accordance 
with paragraph (a)(1)(ii) of this section. In addition, if the household 
submits an application for recertification prior to the end of its 
certification period but is found ineligible for the first month 
following the end of the certification period, then the first month of 
any subsequent participation shall be considered an initial month. 
Conversely, if the household submits an application for recertification 
prior to the end of its certification period and is found eligible for 
the first month following the end of the certification period, then that 
month shall not be an initial month.
    (3) Anticipated changes. Because of anticipated changes, a household 
may be eligible for the month of application, but ineligible in the 
subsequent month. The household shall be entitled to benefits for the 
month of application even if the processing of its application results 
in the benefits being issued in the subsequent month. Similarly, a 
household may be ineligible for the month of application, but eligible 
in the subsequent month due to anticipated changes in circumstances. 
Even though denied for the month of application, the household does not 
have to reapply in the subsequent month. The same application shall be 
used for the denial for the month of application and the determination 
of eligibility for subsequent months, within the timeliness standards in 
Sec. 273.2.
    (4) Changes in allotment levels. As a result of anticipating 
changes, the household's allotment for the month of application may 
differ from its allotment in subsequent months. The State agency shall 
establish a certification period for the longest possible period over 
which changes in the household's circumstances can be reasonably 
anticipated. The household's allotment shall vary month to month within 
the certification period to reflect changes anticipated at the time of 
certification, unless the household elects the averaging techniques in 
paragraphs (c)(3) and (d)(3) of this section.
    (b) Determining resources. Available resources at the time the 
household is interviewed shall be used to determine the household's 
eligibility.
    (c) Determining income--(1) Anticipating income. (i) For the purpose 
of determining the household's eligibility and level of benefits, the 
State agency shall take into account the income already received by the 
household during the certification period and any anticipated income the 
household and the State agency are reasonably certain will be received 
during the remainder of the certification period. If the amount of 
income that will be received, or when it will be received, is uncertain, 
that portion of the household's income that is uncertain shall not be 
counted by the State agency. For example, a household anticipating 
income from a new source, such as a new job or recently applied for 
public assistance benefits, may be uncertain as to the timing and amount 
of the initial payment. These moneys shall not be anticipated by the 
State agency unless there is reasonable certainty concerning the month 
in which the payment will be received and in what amount. If the exact 
amount of the income is not known, that portion of it which can be 
anticipated with reasonable certainty shall be considered as income. In 
cases where the receipt of income is reasonably certain but the monthly 
amount may fluctuate, the household may elect to income average. 
Households shall be advised to report all changes in gross monthly 
income as required by Sec. 273.12.
    (ii) Income received during the past 30 days shall be used as an 
indicator of the income that is and will be available

[[Page 628]]

to the household during the certification period. However, the State 
agency shall not use past income as an indicator of income anticipated 
for the certification period if changes in income have occurred or can 
be anticipated. If income fluctuates to the extent that a 30-day period 
alone cannot provide an accurate indication of anticipated income, the 
State agency and the household may use a longer period of past time if 
it will provide a more accurate indication of anticipated fluctuations 
in future income. Similarly, if the household's income fluctuates 
seasonally, it may be appropriate to use the most recent season 
comparable to the certification period, rather than the last 30 days, as 
one indicator of anticipated income. The State agency shall exercise 
particular caution in using income from a past season as an indicator of 
income for the certification period. In many cases of seasonally 
fluctuating income, the income also fluctuates from one season in one 
year to the same season in the next year. However, in no event shall the 
State agency automatically attribute to the household the amounts of any 
past income. The State agency shall not use past income as an indicator 
of anticipated income when changes in income have occurred or can be 
anticipated during the certification period.
    (2) Income only in month received. (i) Income anticipated during the 
certification period shall be counted as income only in the month it is 
expected to be received, unless the income is averaged. Whenever a full 
month's income is anticipated but is received on a weekly or biweekly 
basis, the State agency shall convert the income to a monthly amount by 
multiplying weekly amounts by 4.3 and biweekly amounts by 2.15, use the 
State Agency's PA conversion standard, or use the exact monthly figure 
if it can be anticipated for each month of the certification period. 
Nonrecurring lump-sum payments shall be counted as a resource starting 
in the month received and shall not be counted as income.
    (ii) Wages held at the request of the employee shall be considered 
income to the household in the month the wages would otherwise have been 
paid by the employer. However, wages held by the employer as a general 
practice, even if in violation of law, shall not be counted as income to 
the household, unless the household anticipates that it will ask for and 
receive an advance, or that it will receive income from wages that were 
previously held by the employer as a general practice and that were, 
therefore, not previously counted as income by the State agency. 
Advances on wages shall count as income in the month received only if 
reasonably anticipated as defined in paragraph (c)(1) of this section.
    (iii) Households receiving income on a recurring monthly or 
semimonthly basis shall not have their monthly income varied merely 
because of changes in mailing cycles or pay dates or because weekends or 
holidays cause additional payments to be received in a month.
    (3) Income averaging. (i) Households, except destitute households, 
and PA households subject to a monthly reporting requirement, may elect 
to have income averaged. Income shall not be averaged for a destitute 
household since averaging would result in assigning to the month of 
application income from future periods which is not available to the 
destitute household for its current food needs. To average income, the 
State agency shall use the household's anticipation of income 
fluctuations over the certification period. The number of months used to 
arrive at the average income need not be the same as the number of 
months in the certification period. For example, if fluctuating income 
for the past 30 days and the month of application are known and, with 
reasonable certainty, are representative of the income fluctuations 
anticipated for the coming months, the income from the 2 known months 
may be averaged and projected over a certification period of longer than 
2 months.
    (ii) Households which, by contract or self-employment, derive their 
annual income in a period of time shorter than 1 year shall have that 
income averaged over a 12-month period, provided the income from the 
contract is not received on an hourly or piecework basis. These 
households may include school employees, sharecroppers, farmers, and

[[Page 629]]

other self-employed households. However, these provisions do not apply 
to migrant or seasonal farmworkers. The procedures for averaging self-
employed income are described in Sec. 273.11. Contract income which is 
not the household's annual income and is not paid on an hourly or 
piecework basis shall be prorated over the period the income is intended 
to cover.
    (iii) Earned and unearned educational income, after allowable 
exclusions, shall be averaged over the period which it is intended to 
cover. Income shall be counted either in the month it is received, or in 
the month the household anticipates receiving it or receiving the first 
installment payment, although it is still prorated over the period it is 
intended to cover.
    (d) Determining deductions. Deductible deductions include only 
certain dependent care, shelter, child support and medical costs as 
described in Sec. 273.9.
    (1) Disallowed expenses. (i) Any expense, in whole or part, covered 
by educational income which has been excluded pursuant to the provisions 
of Sec. 273.9(c)(3) shall not be deductible. For example, the portion of 
rent covered by excluded vendor payments shall not be calculated as part 
of the household's shelter cost. In addition, an expense which is 
covered by an excluded vendor payment that has been converted to a 
direct cash payment under the approval of a federally authorized 
demonstration project as specified under Sec. 273.9(c)(1) shall not be 
deductible. However, that portion of an allowable medical expense which 
is not reimbursable shall be included as part of the household's medical 
expenses. If the household reports an allowable medical expense at the 
time of certification but cannot provide verification at that time, and 
if the amount of the expense cannot be reasonably anticipated based upon 
available information about the recipient's medical condition and public 
or private medical insurance coverage, the household shall have the 
nonreimbursable portion of the medical expense considered at the time 
the amount of the expense or reimbursement is reported and verified. A 
dependent care expense which is reimbursed or paid for by the Job 
Opportunities and Basic Skills Training (JOBS) program under title IV-F 
of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 681) or the Transitional Child 
Care (TCC) program shall not be deductible. A utility expense which is 
reimbursed or paid by an excluded payment, including HUD or FmHA utility 
reimbursements, shall not be deductible.
    (ii) Expenses shall only be deductible if the service is provided by 
someone outside of the household and the household makes a money payment 
for the service. For example, a dependent care deduction shall not be 
allowed if another household member provides the care, or compensation 
for the care is provided in the form of an inkind benefit, such as food.
    (2) Billed expenses. Except as provided in paragraph (d)(3) of this 
section a deduction shall be allowed only in the month the expense is 
billed or otherwise becomes due, regardless of when the household 
intends to pay the expense. For example, rent which is due each month 
shall be included in the household's shelter costs, even if the 
household has not yet paid the expense. Amounts carried forward from 
past billing periods are not deductible, even if included with the most 
recent billing and actually paid by the household. In any event, a 
particular expense may only be deducted once.
    (3) Averaging expenses. Households may elect to have fluctuating 
expenses averaged. Households may also elect to have expenses which are 
billed less often than monthly averaged forward over the interval 
between scheduled billings, or, if there is no scheduled interval, 
averaged forward over the period the expense is intended to cover. For 
example, if a household receives a single bill in February which covers 
a 3-month supply of fuel oil, the bill may be averaged over February, 
March, and April. The household may elect to have one-time only expenses 
averaged over the entire certification period in which they are billed. 
Households reporting one-time only medical expenses during their 
certification period may elect to have a one-time deduction or to have 
the expense averaged over the remaining months of their certification 
period. Averaging would begin the month the change would become 
effective.

[[Page 630]]

    (4) Anticipating expenses. The State agency shall calculate a 
household's expenses based on the expenses the household expects to be 
billed for during the certification period. Anticipation of the expense 
shall be based on the most recent month's bills, unless the household is 
reasonably certain a change will occur. When the household is not 
claiming the utility standard, the State agency may anticipate changes 
during the certification period based on last year's bills from the same 
period updated by overall price increases; or, if only the most recent 
bill is available, utility cost increases or decreases over the months 
of the certification period may be based on utility company estimates 
for the type of dwelling and utilities used by the household. The State 
agency shall not average past expenses, such as utility bills for the 
last several months, as a method of anticipating utility costs for the 
certification period. At certification and recertification, the 
household shall report and verify all medical expenses. The household's 
monthly medical deduction for the certification period shall be based on 
the information reported and verified by the household, and any 
anticipated changes in the household's medical expenses that can be 
reasonably expected to occur during the certification period based on 
available information about the recipient's medical condition, public or 
private insurance coverage, and current verified medical expenses. The 
household shall not be required to file reports about its medical 
expenses during the certification period. If the household voluntarily 
reports a change in its medical expenses, the State agency shall verify 
the change in accordance with Sec. 273.2(f)(8)(ii) if the change would 
increase the household's allotment. The State agency has the option of 
either requiring verification prior to acting on the change, or 
requiring the verification prior to the second normal monthly allotment 
after the change is reported. In the case of a reported change that 
would decrease the household's allotment, or make the household 
ineligible, the State agency shall act on the change without requiring 
verification, though verification which is required by Sec. 273.2(f)(8) 
shall be obtained prior to the household's recertification. If a child 
in the household reaches his or her second birthday during the 
certification period, the $200 maximum dependent care deduction defined 
in Sec. 273.9(d)(4) shall be adjusted in accordance with this section 
not later than the household's next regularly scheduled recertification.
    (5) Conversion of deductions. The income conversion procedures in 
paragraph (c)(2) of this section shall also apply to expenses billed on 
a weekly or biweekly basis.
    (6) Energy Assistance Payments. Except for payments made under the 
Low Income Energy Assistance Act of 1981, the State agency shall prorate 
energy assistance payments as provided for in Sec. 273.9(d) over the 
entire heating or cooling season the payment is intended to cover.
    (7) Households which contain a member who is a disabled SSI 
recipient in accordance with paragraphs (2), (3), (4) or (5) of the 
definition of a disabled member in Sec. 271.2 or households which 
contain a member who is a recipient of SSI benefits and the household is 
determined within the 30-day processing standard to be categorically 
eligible (as discussed in Sec. 273.2(j)) or determined to be eligible as 
an NPA household and later becomes a categorically eligible household, 
shall be entitled to the excess medical deduction of Sec. 273.9(d)(3) 
and the uncapped excess shelter expense deduction of Sec. 273.9(d)(5) 
for the period for which the SSI recipient is authorized to receive SSI 
benefits or the date of the food stamp application, whichever is later, 
if the household incurs such expenses. Households, which contain an SSI 
recipient as discussed in this paragraph, which are determined 
ineligible as an NPA household and later become categorically eligible 
and entitled to restored benefits in accordance with 
Sec. 273.2(j)(1)(iv), shall receive restored benefits using the medical 
and excess shelter expense deductions from the beginning of the period 
for which SSI benefits are paid, the original food stamp application 
date or December 23, 1985, whichever is later, if the household incurs 
such expenses.
    (8) Child support deduction. State agencies may budget child support 
payments prospectively, in accordance

[[Page 631]]

with paragraphs (d)(2) through (d)(5) of this section, or 
retrospectively, in accordance with Sec. 273.21(b) and 
Sec. 273.21(f)(2), regardless of the budgeting system used for the 
household's other circumstances.
    (e) Calculating net income and benefit levels--(1) Net monthly 
income. (i) To determine a household's net monthly income, the State 
agency shall:
    (A) Add the gross monthly income earned by all household members and 
the total monthly unearned income of all household members, minus income 
exclusions, to determine the household's total gross income. Net losses 
from the self-employment income of a farmer shall be offset in 
accordance with Sec. 273.11(a)(2)(iii).
    (B) Multiply the total gross monthly earned income by 20 percent and 
subtract that amount from the total gross income; or multiply the total 
gross monthly earned income by 80 percent and add that to the total 
monthly unearned income, minus income exclusions.
    (C) Subtract the standard deduction.
    (D) If the household is entitled to an excess medical deduction as 
provided in Sec. 273.9(d)(3), determine if total medical expenses exceed 
$35. If so, subtract that portion which exceeds $35.
    (E) Subtract allowable monthly dependent care expenses, if any, up 
to a maximum amount as specified under Sec. 273.9(d)(4) for each 
dependent. If the household is entitled to an excess shelter deduction, 
compute the household's excess shelter deduction in accordance with 
paragraph (e)(1)(i)(G) of this section.
    (F) Subtract allowable monthly child support payments in accordance 
with Sec. 273.9(d)(7).
    (G) Total the allowable shelter expenses to determine shelter costs. 
Subtract from total shelter costs 50 percent of the household's monthly 
income after all the above deductions have been subtracted. The 
remaining amount, if any, is the excess shelter cost. If there is no 
excess shelter cost, the net monthly income has been determined. If 
there is excess shelter cost, compute the shelter deduction according to 
paragraph (e)(1)(i)(H) of this section.
    (H) Subtract the excess shelter cost up to the maximum amount 
allowed for the area (unless the household is entitled to the full 
amount of its excess shelter expenses) from the household's monthly 
income after all other applicable deductions. Households not subject to 
a capped shelter expense shall have the full amount exceeding 50 percent 
of their net income subtracted. The household's net monthly income has 
been determined.
    (ii) In calculating net monthly income, the State agency shall use 
one of the following two procedures:
    (A) Round down each income and allotment calculation that ends in 1 
through 49 cents and round up each calculation that ends in 50 through 
99 cents; or
    (B) Apply the rounding procedure that is currently in effect for the 
State's Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) program. If the 
State AFDC program includes the cents in income calculations, the State 
agency may use the same procedures for food stamp income calculations. 
Whichever procedure is used, the State agency may elect to include the 
cents associated with each individual shelter cost in the computation of 
the shelter deduction and round the final shelter deduction amount. 
Likewise, the State agency may elect to include the cents associated 
with each individual medical cost in the computation of the medical 
deduction and round the final medical deduction amount.
    (2) Eligibility and benefits. (i)(A) Households which contain an 
elderly or disabled member as defined in Sec. 271.2, shall have their 
net income, as calculated in paragraph (e)(1) of this section (except 
for households considered destitute in accordance with paragraph (e)(3) 
of this section), compared to the monthly income eligibility standards 
defined in Sec. 273.9(a)(2) for the appropriate household size to 
determine eligibility for the month.
    (B) In addition to meeting the net income eligibility standards, 
households which do not contain an elderly or disabled member shall have 
their gross income, as calculated in accordance with paragraph 
(e)(1)(i)(A) of this section, compared to the gross monthly income 
standards defined in Sec. 273.9(a)(1) for the

[[Page 632]]

appropriate household size to determine eligibility for the month.
    (C) For households considered destitute in accordance with paragraph 
(e)(3) of this section, the State agency shall determine a household's 
eligibility by computing its gross and net income according to paragraph 
(e)(3) of this section, and comparing, as appropriate, the gross and/or 
net income to the corresponding income eligibility standard in 
accordance with Sec. 273.9(a) (1) or (2).
    (D) If a household contains a member who is fifty-nine years old on 
the date of application, but who will become sixty before the end of the 
month of application, the State agency shall determine the household's 
eligibility in accordance with paragraph (e)(2)(i)(A) of this section.
    (E) If a household contains a student whose income is excluded in 
accordance with Sec. 273.9(c)(7) and the student becomes 22 during the 
month of application, the State agency shall exclude the student's 
earnings in the month of application and count the student's earnings in 
the following month. If the student becomes 22 during the certification 
period, the student's income shall be excluded until the month following 
the month in which the student turns 22.
    (ii)(A) Except as provided in paragraphs (a)(1), (e)(2)(iii) and 
(e)(2)(vi) of this section, the household's monthly allotment shall be 
equal to the maximum food stamp allotment for the household's size 
reduced by 30 percent of the household's net monthly income as 
calculated in paragraph (e)(1) of this section. If 30 percent of the 
household's net income ends in cents, the State agency shall round in 
one of the following ways:
    (1) The State agency shall round the 30 percent of net income up to 
the nearest higher dollar; or
    (2) The State agency shall not round the 30 percent of net income at 
all. Instead, after subtracting the 30 percent of net income from the 
appropriate Thrifty Food Plan, the State agency shall round the 
allotment down to the nearest lower dollar.
    (B) If the calculation of benefits in accordance with paragraph 
(e)(2)(ii)(A) of this section for an initial month would yield an 
allotment of less than $10 for the household, no benefits shall be 
issued to the household for the initial month.
    (C) Except during an initial month, all eligible one- and two-person 
households shall receive minimum monthly allotments equal to the minimum 
benefit and all eligible households with three or more members which are 
entitled to $1, $3, and $5 allotments shall receive allotments, of $2, 
$4, and $6, respectively, to correspond with current coupon book 
determinations.
    (iii) For an eligible household with three or more members which is 
entitled to no benefits (except because of the proration requirements of 
paragraph (a)(1) and the provision precluding issuances of less than $10 
in an initial month of paragraph (e)(2)(ii)(B)) of this section:
    (A) The State agency shall deny the household's application on the 
grounds that its net income exceeds the level at which benefits are 
issued; or
    (B) The State agency shall certify the household but suspend its 
participation, subject to the following conditions:
    (1) The State agency shall inform the suspended household, in 
writing, of its suspended status, and of its rights and responsibilities 
while it is in that status.
    (2) The State agency shall set the household's change reporting 
requirements and the manner in which those changes will be reported and 
processed.
    (3) The State agency shall specify which changes shall entitle the 
household to have its status converted from suspension to issuance, and 
which changes shall require the household to reapply for participation.
    (4) The household shall retain the right to submit a new application 
while it is suspended.
    (5) The State agency shall convert a household from suspension to 
issuance status, without requiring an additional certification 
interview, and issue its initial allotment, within ten days of the date 
the household reports the change.
    (6) The State agency shall prorate the household's benefits, in the 
first month after the suspension period, from the date the household 
reports a

[[Page 633]]

change, in accordance with paragraph (a)(1) of this section.
    (7) The State agency may delay the work registration of the 
household's members until the household is determined to be entitled to 
benefits.
    (iv) For those eligible households which are entitled to no benefits 
in their initial month of application, in accordance with paragraph 
(a)(1) or (e)(2)(ii)(B) of this section, but are entitled to benefits in 
subsequent months, the State agency shall certify the households 
beginning with the month of application.
    (v) When a household's circumstances change and it becomes entitled 
to a different income eligibility standard, the State agency shall apply 
the different standard at the next recertification or whenever the State 
agency changes the household's eligibility, benefit level or 
certification period, whichever occurs first.
    (vi) During a month when a reduction, suspension or cancellation of 
allotments has been ordered pursuant to the provisions of Sec. 271.7, 
eligible housholds shall have their benefits calculated as follows:
    (A) If a benefit reduction is ordered, State agencies shall reduce 
the maximum food stamp allotment amounts for each household size by the 
percentage ordered in the Department's notice on benefit reductions. 
State agencies shall multiply the maximum food stamp allotment amounts 
by the percentage specified in the FCS notice; if the result ends in 1 
through 99 cents, round the result up to the nearest higher dollar; and 
subtract the result from the normal maximum food stamp allotment amount. 
In calculating benefit levels for eligible households, State agencies 
would follow the procedures detailed in paragraph (e)(2)(ii) of this 
section and substitute the reduced maximum food stamp allotment amounts 
for the normal maximum food stamp allotment amounts.
    (B) Except as provided in paragraphs (a)(1), (e)(2)(ii)(B), and 
(e)(2)(vi)(C) of this section, one- and two-person households shall be 
provided with at least the minimum benefit.
    (C) In the event that the national reduction in benefits is 90 
percent or more of the benefits projected to be issued for the affected 
month, the provision for a minimum benefit for households with one or 
two members only may be disregarded and all households may have their 
benefits lowered by reducing maximum food stamp allotment amounts by the 
percentage specified by the Department. The benefit reduction notice 
issued by the Department to effectuate a benefit reduction will specify 
whether minimum benefits for households with one or two members only are 
to be provided to households.
    (D) If the action in effect is a suspension or cancellation, 
eligible households shall have their allotment levels calculated 
according to the procedures in paragraph (e)(2)(ii) of this section. 
However, the allotments shall not be issued for the month the suspension 
or cancellation is in effect. The provision for the minimum benefit for 
households with one or two members only shall be disregarded and all 
households shall have their benefits suspended or cancelled for the 
designated month.
    (E) In the event of a suspension or cancellation, or a reduction 
exceeding 90 percent of the affected month's projected issuance, all 
households, including one and two-person households, shall have their 
benefits suspended, cancelled or reduced by the percentage specified by 
FCS.
    (3) Destitute households. Migrant or seasonal farmworker households 
may have little or no income at the time of application and may be in 
need of immediate food assistance, even though they receive income at 
some other time during the month of application. The following 
procedures shall be used to determine when migrant or seasonal 
farmworker households in these circumstances may be considered destitute 
and, therefore, entitled to expedited service and special income 
calculation procedures. Households other than migrant or seasonal 
farmworker households shall not be classified as destitute.
    (i) Households whose only income for the month of application was 
received prior to the date of application, and was from a terminated 
source, shall be considered destitute households and shall be provided 
expedited service.
    (A) If income is received on a monthly or more frequent basis, it 
shall be

[[Page 634]]

considered as coming from a terminated source if it will not be received 
again from the same source during the balance of the month of 
application or during the following month.
    (B) If income is normally received less often than monthly, the 
nonreceipt of income from the same source in the balance of the month of 
application or in the following month is inappropriate to determine 
whether or not the income is terminated. For example, if income is 
received on a quarterly basis (e.g., on January 1, April 1, July 1, and 
October 1), and the household applies in mid-January, the income should 
not be considered as coming from a terminated source merely because no 
further payments will be received in the balance of January or in 
February. The test for whether or not this household's income is 
terminated is whether the income is anticipated to be received in April. 
Therefore, for households that normally receive income less often than 
monthly, the income shall be considered as coming from a terminated 
source if it will not be received in the month in which the next payment 
would normally be received.
    (ii) Households whose only income for the month of application is 
from a new source shall be considered destitute and shall be provided 
expedited service if income of more than $25 from the new source will 
not be received by the 10th calendar day after the date of application.
    (A) Income which is normally received on a monthly or more frequent 
basis shall be considered to be from a new source if income of more than 
$25 has not been received from that source within 30 days prior to the 
date the application was filed.
    (B) If income is normally received less often than monthly, it shall 
be considered to be from a new source if income of more than $25 was not 
received within the last normal interval between payments. For example, 
if a household applies in early January and is expecting to be paid 
every 3 months, starting in late January, the income shall be considered 
to be from a new source if no income of more than $25 was received from 
the source during October or since that time.
    (iii) Households may receive both income from a terminated source 
prior to the date of application, and income from a new source after the 
date of application, and still be considered destitute if they receive 
no other income in the month of application and income of more than $25 
from the new source will not be received by the 10th day after the date 
of application.
    (iv) Destitute households shall have their eligibility and level of 
benefits calculated for the month of application by considering only 
income which is received between the first of the month and the date of 
application. Any income from a new source that is anticipated after the 
day of application shall be disregarded.
    (v) Some employers provide travel advances to cover the travel costs 
of new employees who must journey to the location of their new 
employment. To the extent that these payments are excluded as 
reimbursements, receipt of travel advances will not affect the 
determination of when a household is destitute. However, if the travel 
advance is by written contract an advance of wages that will be 
subtracted from wages later earned by the employee, rather than a 
reimbursement, the wage advance shall count as income. In addition, the 
receipt of a wage advance for travel costs of a new employee shall not 
affect the determination of whether subsequent payments from the 
employer are from a new source of income, nor whether a household shall 
be considered destitute. For example, if a household applies on May 10, 
has received a $50 advance for travel from its new employer on May 1 
which by written contract is an advance on wages, but will not receive 
any other wages from the employer until May 30, the household shall be 
considered destitute. The May 30 payment shall be disregarded, but the 
wage advance received prior to the date of application shall be counted 
as income.
    (vi) A household member who changes jobs but continues to work for 
the same employer shall be considered as still receiving income from the 
same source. A migrant farmworker's source of income shall be considered 
to be the grower for whom the migrant is working at a particular point 
in time, and

[[Page 635]]

not the crew chief. A migrant who travels with the same crew chief but 
moves from one grower to another shall be considered to have moved from 
a terminated income source to a new source.
    (vii) The above procedures shall apply at initial application and at 
recertification, but only for the first month of each certification 
period. At recertification, income from a new source shall be 
disregarded in the first month of the new certification period if income 
of more than $25 will not be received from this new source by the 10th 
calendar day after the date of the household's normal issuance cycle.
    (4) Thrifty Food Plan (TFP) and Maximum Food Stamp Allotments.
    (i) Maximum food stamp allotment level. Maximum food stamp 
allotments shall be based on the TFP as defined in Sec. 271.2, and they 
shall be uniform by household size throughout the 48 contiguous States 
and the District of Columbia. The TFP for Hawaii shall be the TFP for 
the 48 States and DC adjusted for the price of food in Honolulu. The 
TFPs for urban, rural I, and rural II parts of Alaska shall be the TFP 
for the 48 States and DC adjusted by the price of food in Anchorage and 
further adjusted for urban, rural I, and rural II Alaska as defined in 
Sec. 272.7(c). The TFPs for Guam and the Virgin Islands shall be 
adjusted for changes in the cost of food in the 48 States and DC, 
provided that the cost of these TFPs may not exceed the cost of the 
highest TFP for the 50 States. The TFP amounts and maximum allotments in 
each area are adjusted annually and will be prescribed in a General 
Notice published in the Federal Register.
    (ii) Adjustment. (A) Effective October 1, 1982, the Thrifty Food 
Plan amounts shall be adjusted to the nearest lower dollar increment to 
reflect changes in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers for 
the cost of food during the twenty-one month period ending June 30, 
1982, less one percent of the adjusted Thrifty Food Plan.
    (B) Effective October 1, 1983, and October 1, 1984, the Thrifty Food 
Plan amounts shall be adjusted to the nearest lower dollar increment to 
reflect changes in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers for 
the cost of food during the twelve month period ending on the preceding 
June 30, less one percent of the adjusted Thrifty Food Plan.
    (C) Effective October 1, 1985, October 1, 1986, and October 1, 1987, 
the Thrifty Food Plan amounts shall be adjusted to the nearest lower 
dollar increment to reflect changes in the Consumer Price Index for All 
Urban Consumers for the cost of food during the twelve month period 
ending on the preceding June 30.
    (D) Effective October 1, 1988, maximum food stamp allotments shall 
be based on 100.65 percent of the cost of the TFP for the preceding 
June, rounded to the nearest lower dollar increment.
    (E) Effective October 1, 1989, maximum food stamp allotments shall 
be based on 102.05 percent of the cost of the TFP for the preceding 
June, rounded to the nearest lower dollar increment.
    (F) Effective October 1, 1990 and each October 1, thereafter, 
maximum food stamp allotments shall be based on 103 percent of the cost 
of the TFP for the preceding June, rounded to the nearest lower dollar 
increment.
    (f) Certification periods. The State agency shall establish a 
definite period of time within which a household shall be eligible to 
receive benefits. At the expiration of each certification period, 
entitlement to food stamp benefits ends. Further eligibility shall be 
established only upon a recertification based upon a newly completed 
application, an interview, and verification as required by 
Sec. 273.2(f). Under no circumstances shall benefits be continued beyond 
the end of a certification period without a new determination of 
eligibility.
    (1) Certification periods shall conform to calendar months, except 
where FCS has approved the use of fiscal months. At initial application, 
the first month in the certification period shall generally be the month 
of application, even if the household's eligibility is not determined 
until a subsequent month. For example, if a household files an 
application in January and the application is not processed until 
February, a 6-month certification period would include January through 
June. Upon recertification, the certification

[[Page 636]]

period will begin with the month following the last month of the 
previous certification period.
    (2) [Reserved]
    (3)(i) Households in which all members are included in a single PA 
or GA grant shall have their food stamp recertifications at the same 
time they are redetermined for PA or GA. Definite food stamp 
certification periods must be assigned to these households in accordance 
with the provisions of this section, however, those periods may be 
shortened or extended in order to align the food stamp recertification 
date with the PA or GA redetermination date. The household's food stamp 
certification period can only be extended when the household is 
initially approved for PA/GA. The food stamp certification period may be 
extended up to 12 months to align the food stamp certification period 
with the PA/GA redetermination period. If the household's certification 
period is extended, the State agency shall notify the household of the 
changes in its certification period. At the end of the extended 
certification period the household must be sent a Notice of Expiration 
and must be recertified before being eligible for further food stamp 
assistance, even if the PA or GA redetermination is not set to expire. 
If the household's certification period is shortened, the State agency 
shall send it a notice of expiration which informs the household that 
its certification period will expire at the end of the month following 
the month the notice of expiration is sent and that it must reapply if 
it wishes to continue to participate. The notice of expiration shall 
also explain to the household that its certification period is expiring 
in order that it may be recertified for food stamps at the same time 
that it is redetermined for PA or GA.
    (ii) Households in which all members receive assistance under Title 
XIX of the Social Security Act or other medical assistance program may 
have their food stamp recertification at the same time they are 
redetermined for assistance under Title XIX or other medical assistance 
program. The State agency must follow the same requirements that apply 
in paragraph (f)(3)(i) of this section.
    (4) Households shall be assigned the longest certification periods 
possible based on the predictability of the household's circumstances. 
Households shall be certified for at least 3 months, except as follows:
    (i) Households eligible for a certification period of 3 months or 
less shall, at the time of certification, have their certification 
periods increased by 1 month, if the certification process is completed 
after the 15th day of the month of application and the household's 
circumstances warrant the longer certification period. For example, if a 
household which is eligible for a 3-month certification period makes 
application in June and is not certified until late June or early July, 
the certification period would include June through September.
    (ii) Households shall be certified for 1 or 2 months, as 
appropriate, when the household cannot reasonably predict what its 
circumstances will be in the near future, or when there is a substantial 
likelihood of frequent and significant changes in income or household 
status; for example, day laborers and migrant workers if income is 
uncertain and subject to large fluctuations during the work season due 
to the uncertainty of continuous employment or due to bad weather and 
other circumstances.
    (iii) If a State agency opts to effect the Social Security/SSI cost-
of-living increase through the process of recertification, the affected 
cases shall be assigned certification periods that ensure that they are 
due for recertification in accordance with Sec. 273.12(e)(3)(ii). 
Households entitled to a certification period of up to 12 months as 
discussed in paragraph (f)(5) of this section shall, on a one-time 
basis, be certified for less than a year in order to comply with this 
provision.
    (5) Households shall be certified for up to 6 months if there is 
little likelihood of changes in income and household status; for 
example, households with a stable income record and for which major 
changes in income, deductions, or composition are not anticipated.
    (6) Households consisting entirely of unemployable or elderly 
persons with very stable income shall be certified

[[Page 637]]

for up to 12 months provided other household circumstances are expected 
to remain stable; for example, social security recipients, SSI 
recipients and persons who receive pensions or disability payments.
    (7) Households whose primary source of income is from self-
employment (including self-employed farmers) or from regular farm 
employment with the same employer shall be certified for up to 12 
months, provided income can be readily predicted and household 
circumstances are not likely to change. Annual certification periods may 
be assigned to farmworkers who are provided their annual salaries on a 
scheduled monthly basis which does not change as the amount of work 
changes.
    (8) Households required to submit monthly reports in accordance with 
Sec. 273.21(b) shall be certified for not less than six months and not 
more than 12 months. The limit of 12 months may be waived for these 
households if the State agency can demonstrate that such a waiver would 
result in improved administration of the Program. The six-month minimum 
may be waived for households subject to less frequent than monthly 
reporting if the State agency can demonstrate that such a waiver would 
result in improved administration of the Program.
    (9) Households eligible for a child support deduction that have no 
record of regular child support payments or of child support arrearages 
and are not required to report child support payment information 
required by the State agency periodically (monthly or quarterly) during 
the certification period shall be certified for no more than 3 months. 
Households with a record of regular child support and arrearage payments 
that are not required to report payment information periodically during 
the certification period shall be certified for no more than 6 months. 
These requirements do not apply to households whose certification 
periods are established in accordance with paragraphs (f)(3), (f)(6), or 
(f)(7) of this section. Households required to report monthly or 
quarterly shall be assigned certification periods in accordance with 
paragraph (f)(8) of this section.
    (g) Certification notices to households. (1) Initial applications. 
State agencies shall provide applicants with one of the following 
written notices as soon as a determination is made, but no later than 30 
days after the date of the initial application:
    (i) Notice of eligibility. (A) If an application is approved, the 
State agency shall provide the household with written notice of the 
amount of the allotment and the beginning and ending dates of the 
certification period. The household shall also be advised of variations 
in the benefit level based on changes anticipated at the time of 
certification. If the initial allotment contains benefits for both the 
month of application and the current month's benefits, the notice shall 
explain that the initial allotment includes more than 1 month's 
benefits, and shall indicate the monthly allotment amount for the 
remainder of the certification period. The notice shall also advise the 
household of its right to a fair hearing, the telephone number of the 
food stamp office (a toll-free number or a number where collect calls 
will be accepted for households outside the local calling area), and, if 
possible, the name of the person to contact for additional information. 
If there is an individual or organization available that provides free 
legal representation, the notice shall also advise the household of the 
availability of the services. The State agency may also include in the 
notice a reminder of the household's obligation to report changes in 
circumstance and of the need to reapply for continued participation at 
the end of the certification period. Other information which would be 
useful to the household may also be included.
    (B) In cases where a household's application is approved on an 
expedited basis without verification, as provided in Sec. 273.2(i), the 
notice shall explain that the household must provide the verification 
which was waived. If the State agency has elected to assign a longer 
certification period to some households certified on an expedited basis, 
the notice shall also explain the special conditions of the longer 
certification period, as specified in Sec. 273.2(i), and the 
consequences of failure to provide the postponed verification.

[[Page 638]]

    (C) For households provided a notice of expiration at the time of 
certification, as required in Sec. 273.14(b), the notice of eligibility 
may be combined with the notice of expiration or separate notices may be 
sent.
    (ii) Notice of denial. If the application is denied, the State 
agency shall provide the household with written notice explaining the 
basis for the denial, the household's right to request a fair hearing, 
the telephone number of the food stamp office (a toll-free number or a 
number where collect calls will be accepted for households outside the 
local calling area), and, if possible, the name of the person to contact 
for additional information. If there is an individual or organization 
available that provides free legal representation, the notice shall also 
advise the household of the availability of the service. A household 
which is potentially categorically eligible but whose food stamp 
application is denied shall be asked to inform the State agency if it is 
approved to receive PA and/or SSI benefits or benefits from a State or 
local GA program. In cases where the State agency has elected to use a 
notice of denial when a delay was caused by the household's failure to 
take action to complete the application process, as provided in 
Sec. 273.2(h)(2), the notice of denial shall also explain: The action 
that the household must take to reactivate the application; that the 
case will be reopened without a new application if action is taken 
within 30 days of the date the notice of denial was mailed; and that the 
household must submit a new application if, at the end of the 30-day 
period, the household has not taken the needed action and wishes to 
participate in the program. If the State agency chooses the option 
specified in Sec. 273.2(h)(2) of reopening the application in cases 
where verification is lacking only if household provides verification 
within 30 days of the date of the initial request for verification, the 
State agency shall include on the notice of denial the date by which the 
household must provide the missing verification.
    (iii) Notice of pending status. If the application is to be held 
pending because some action by the State is necessary to complete the 
application process, as specified in Sec. 273.2(h)(2), or the State 
agency has elected to pend all cases regardless of the reason for delay, 
the State agency shall provide the household with a written notice which 
informs the household that its application has not been completed and is 
being processed. If some action by the household is also needed to 
complete the application process, the notice shall also explain what 
action the household must take and that its application will be denied 
if the household fails to take the required action within 60 days of the 
date the application was filed. If the State agency chooses the option 
specified in Sec. 273.2(h) (2) and (3) of holding the application 
pending in cases where verification is lacking only until 30 days 
following the date verification was initially requested, the State 
agency shall include on the notice of pending status the date by which 
the household must provide the missing verification.
    (2) Applications for recertification. The State agency shall provide 
households that have filed an application by the 15th of the last month 
of their certification period with either a notice of eligibility or a 
notice of denial by the end of the current certification period if the 
household has complied with all recertification requirements. The State 
agency shall provide households that have received a notice of 
expiration at the time of certification, and have timely reapplied, with 
either a notice of eligibility or a notice of denial not later than 30 
days after the date of the household's initial opportunity to obtain its 
last allotment.

[Amdt. 132, 43 FR 47889, Oct. 17, 1978]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting 
Sec. 273.10, see the List of CFR Sections Affected in the Finding Aids 
section of this volume.


<R05>
Sec. 273.11  Action on households with special circumstances.

    (a) Self-employment income. The procedures for handling income 
received from boarders by a household that does not own and operate a 
commercial boardinghouse are described in paragraph (b) of this section. 
For all other households receiving self-employment income, including 
those households that own and operate a commercial boardinghouse, the 
State agency shall

[[Page 639]]

calculate the self-employment income as follows:
    (1) Annualizing self-employment income. (i) Self-employment income 
which represents a household's annual income shall be annualized over a 
12-month period even if the income is received within only a short 
period of time during that 12 months. For example, self-employment 
income received by farmers shall be averaged over a 12-month period, if 
the income is intended to support the farmer on an annual basis. 
However, if the averaged annualized amount does not accurately reflect 
the household's actual circumstances because the household has 
experienced a substantial increase or decrease in business, the State 
agency shall calculate the self-employment income on anticipated 
earnings. The State agency shall not calculate self-employment income on 
the basis of prior income (e.g. income tax returns) when the household 
has experienced a substantial increase or decrease in business. This 
self-employment income shall be annualized even if the household 
receives income from other sources in addition to self-employment.
    (ii) Self-employment income which is received on a monthly basis but 
which represents a household's annual support shall normally be averaged 
over a 12-month period. If, however, the averaged amount does not 
accurately reflect the household's actual monthly circumstances because 
the household has experienced a substantial increase or decrease in 
business, the State agency shall calculate the self-employment income 
based on anticipated earnings.
    (iii) Self-employment income which is intended to meet the 
household's needs for only part of the year shall be averaged over the 
period of time the income is intended to cover. For example, self-
employed vendors who work only in the summer and supplement their income 
from other sources during the balance of the year shall have their self-
employment income averaged over the summer months rather than a 12-month 
period.
    (iv) If a household's self-employment enterprise has been in 
existence for less than a year, the income from that self-employment 
enterprise shall be averaged over the period of time the business has 
been in operation, and the monthly amount projected for the coming year. 
However, if the business has been in operation for such a short time 
that there is insufficient information to make a reasonable projection, 
the household may be certified for less than a year until the business 
has been in operation long enough to base a longer projection.
    (v) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs (i) through (iv) of 
this paragraph, households subject to MRRB who derive their self-
employment income from a farming operation and who incur irregular 
expenses to produce such income shall have the option to annualize the 
allowable costs of producing self-employment income from farming when 
the self-employment farm income is annualized.
    (2) Determining monthly income from self-employment. (i) For the 
period of time over which self-employment income is determined, the 
State agency shall add all gross self-employment income (including 
capital gains), exclude the cost of producing the self-employment 
income, and divide the self-employment income by the number of months 
over which the income will be averaged.
    (ii) For those households whose self-employment income is not 
averaged but is instead calculated on an anticipated basis, the State 
agency shall add any capital gains the household anticipates it will 
receive in the next 12 months, starting with the date the application is 
filed, and divide this amount by 12. This amount shall be used in 
successive certification periods during the next 12 months, except that 
a new average monthly amount shall be calculated over this 12-month 
period if the anticipated amount of capital gains changes. The State 
agency shall then add the anticipated monthly amount of capital gains to 
the anticipated monthly self-employment income, and subtract the cost of 
producing the self-employment income. The cost of producing the self-
employment income shall be calculated by anticipating the monthly 
allowable costs of producing the self-employment income.
    (iii) The monthly net self-employment income shall be added to any

[[Page 640]]

other earned income received by the household. The total monthly earned 
income, less a 20 percent earned income deduction, shall then be added 
to all monthly unearned income received by the household. If the cost of 
producing self-employment income exceeds the income derived from self-
employment as a farmer, such losses shall be offset against any other 
countable income in the household. Losses from farm self-employment 
enterprises shall be offset in two phases. The first phase is an 
offsetting against non-farm self-employment income. The second phase is 
offsetting against the total of earned and unearned income. For purposes 
of this provision, to be considered a self-employed farmer, the farmer 
must receive or anticipate receiving annual gross proceeds of $1000 or 
more from the farming enterprise. The standard deduction, dependent 
care, and shelter costs shall be computed in accordance with 
Sec. 273.9(d) and subtracted to determine the monthly net income of the 
household. Net losses from the self-employment income of a farmer shall 
be prorated over the year in accordance with Sec. 273.11(a)(1).
    (iv) If a State agency determines that a household is eligible based 
on its monthly net income, the State may elect to offer the household an 
option to determine the benefit level by using either the same net 
income which was used to determine eligibility, or by unevenly prorating 
the household's total net income over the period for which the 
household's self-employment income was averaged to more closely 
approximate the time when the income is actually received. If income is 
prorated, the net income assigned in any month cannot exceed the maximum 
monthly income eligibility standards for the household's size.
    (3) Capital gains. The proceeds from the sale of capital goods or 
equipment shall be calculated in the same manner as a capital gain for 
Federal income tax purposes. Even if only 50 percent of the proceeds 
from the sale of capital goods or equipment is taxed for Federal income 
tax purposes, the State agency shall count the full amount of the 
capital gain as income for food stamp purposes.
    (4) Allowable costs of producing self-employment income. (i) 
Allowable costs of producing self-employment income include, but are not 
limited to, the identifiable costs of labor, stock, raw material, seed 
and fertilizer, interest paid to purchase income-producing property, 
insurance premiums, and taxes paid on income-producing property.
    (ii) In determining net self-employment income, the following items 
shall not be allowable as costs of doing business:
    (A) Payments on the principal of the purchase price of income-
producing real estate and capital assets, equipment, machinery, and 
other durable goods;
    (B) Net losses from previous periods;
    (C) Federal, State, and local income taxes, money set aside for 
retirement purposes, and other work-related personal expenses (such as 
transportation to and from work), as these expenses are accounted for by 
the 20-percent earned income deduction specified in Sec. 273.9(d)(2); 
and
    (D) Depreciation.
    (5) Assigning certification periods. (i) Households that receive 
their annual support from self-employment and have no other source of 
income may be certified for up to 12 months. For those households that 
receive other sources of income or whose self-employment income is 
intended to cover a period of time that is less than a year, the State 
agency shall assign a certification period appropriate for the 
household's circumstances.
    (ii) For those self-employed households that receive their annual 
income in a short period of time, the initial certification period shall 
be assigned to bring the household into the annual cycle. For example, 
the State agency may provide for recertification at the time the 
household normally receives all or a majority of its annual income or 
the State agency may prefer to have the annual cycle coincide with the 
filing of the household's income tax.
    (b) Households with income from boarders and day care.--(1)  
Households with boarders. Persons paying a reasonable amount for room 
and board as specified in Sec. 273.1(c) shall be excluded from the 
household when determining the household's eligibility and benefit 
level. The

[[Page 641]]

income of households owning and operating a commercial boardinghouse 
shall be handled as described in paragraph (a) of this section. For all 
other households, payments from the boarder, except forter care boarders 
as defined in Sec. 273.1(c)(6), shall be treated as self-employment 
income and the household's eligibility determined as follows:
    (i) Income from the boarder. The income from boarders shall include 
all direct payments to the household for room and meals, including 
contributions to the household's shelter expenses. Shelter expenses paid 
directly by boarders to someone outside of the household shall not be 
counted as income to the household.
    (ii) Cost of doing business. In determining the income received from 
boarders, the State agency shall exclude the portion of the boarder 
payment that is a cost of doing business. The amount allowed as a cost 
of doing business shall not exceed the payment the household receives 
from the boarder for lodging and meals. Households may elect one of the 
following methods to determine the cost of doing business:
    (A) The cost of the maximum food stamp allotment for a household 
size that is equal to the number of boarders; or
    (B) The actual documented cost of providing room and meals, if the 
actual cost exceeds the appropriate maximum food stamp allotment. If 
actual costs are used, only separate and identifiable costs of providing 
room and meals to boarders shall be excluded; or
    (C) A flat amount or fixed percentage of the gross income, provided 
that the method used to determine the flat amount or fixed percentage is 
objective and justifiable and is stated in the State's food stamp 
manual.
    (iii) Deductible expenses. The net income from self-employment shall 
be added to other earned income and a 20-percent earned income deduction 
shall be applied to the total. Shelter costs the household actually 
incurs, even if the boarder contributes to the household for part of the 
household's shelter expenses, shall be computed to determine if the 
household will receive a shelter deduction. However, the shelter costs 
shall not include any shelter expenses paid directly by the boarder to a 
third party, such as to the landlord or utility company.
    (2) Income from day care. Households deriving income from day care 
may elect one of the following methods of determining the cost of meals 
provided to the individuals:
    (i) Actual documented costs of meals;
    (ii) A standard per day amount based on estimated per meal costs; or
    (iii) Current reimbursement amounts used in the Child and Adult Care 
Food Program.
    (c) Treatment of income and resources of certain nonhousehold 
members. During the period of time that a household member cannot 
participate because he/she is an ineligible alien, is ineligible because 
of disqualification for an intentional Program violation, is ineligible 
because of noncompliance with a work requirement of Sec. 273.7 is 
ineligible because of disqualification for failure or refusal to obtain 
or provide an SSN, or is ineligible because a sanction has been imposed 
while he/she was participating in a household disqualified for failing 
to comply with workfare requirements, the eligibility and benefit level 
of any remaining household members shall be determined in accordance 
with the procedures outlined in this section.
    (1) Intentional Program violation disqualification, workfare, or 
work requirement sanction. The eligibility and benefit level of any 
remaining household members of a household containing individuals 
determined ineligible because of disqualification for intentional 
Program violation noncompliance with a work requirement of Sec. 273.7 or 
imposition of a sanction while they were participating in a household 
disqualified for failure to comply with workfare requirements shall be 
determined as follows:
    (i) Income, resources, and deductible expenses. The income and 
resources of the ineligible household member(s) shall continue to count 
in their entirety, and the entire household's allowable earned income, 
standard, medical, dependent care, child support, and excess shelter 
deductions shall continue to apply to the remaining household members.

[[Page 642]]

    (ii) Eligibility and benefit level. The ineligible member shall not 
be included when determining the household's size for the purposes of:
    (A) Assigning a benefit level to the household;
    (B) Comparing the household's monthly income with the income 
eligibility standards; or
    (C) Comparing the household's resources with the resource 
eligibility limits. The State agency shall ensure that no household's 
coupon allotment is increased as a result of the exclusion of one or 
more household members.
    (2) SSN disqualification and ineligible alien. The eligibility and 
benefit level of any remaining household members of a household 
containing individuals determined to be ineligible for being an 
ineligible alien or because of disqualification for refusal to obtain or 
provide an SSN shall be determined as follows:
    (i) Resources. The resources of such ineligible members shall 
continue to count in their entirety to the remaining household members.
    (ii) Income. A pro rata share of the income of such ineligible 
members shall be counted as income to the remaining members. This pro 
rata share is calculated by first subtracting the allowable exclusions 
from the ineligible member's income and dividing the income evenly among 
the household members, including the ineligible members. All but the 
ineligible members' share is counted as income for the remaining 
household members.
    (iii) Deductible expenses. The 20 percent earned income deduction 
shall apply to the prorated income earned by such ineligible members 
which is attributed to their households. That portion of the households' 
allowable child support payment, shelter and dependent care expenses 
which are either paid by or billed to the ineligible members shall be 
divided evenly among the households' members including the ineligible 
members. All but the ineligible members' share is counted as a 
deductible child support payment, shelter or dependent care expense for 
the remaining household members.
    (iv) Eligibility and benefit level. Such ineligible members shall 
not be included when determining their households' sizes for the 
purposes of:
    (A) Assigning a benefit level to the household;
    (B) Comparing the household's monthly income with the income 
eligibility standards; or
    (C) Comparing the household's resources with the resource 
eligibility limits.
    (3) Reduction or termination of benefits within the certification 
period. Whenever an individual is determined ineligible within the 
household's certification period, the State agency shall determine the 
eligibility or ineligibility of the remaining household members based, 
as much as possible, on information in the case file.
    (i) Excluded for intentional Program violation disqualification. If 
a household's benefits are reduced or terminated within the 
certification period because one of its members was excluded because of 
disqualification for intentional Program violation, the State agency 
shall notify the remaining members of their eligibility and benefit 
level at the same time the excluded member is notified of his or her 
disqualification. The household is not entitled to a notice of adverse 
action but may request a fair hearing to contest the reduction or 
termination of benefits, unless the household has already had a fair 
hearing on the amount of the claim as a result of consolidation of the 
administrative disqualification hearing with the fair hearing.
    (ii) SSN or workfare disqualification, ineligible alien, or work 
requirement sanction. If a household's benefits are reduced or 
terminated within the certification period because one or more of its 
members is an ineligible alien, is ineligible because a sanction has 
been imposed while he/she was participating in a household disqualified 
for failing to comply with workfare requirements, is ineligible because 
of noncompliance with a work requirement of Sec. 273.7 or is ineligible 
because he/she was disqualified for refusal to obtain or provide an SSN, 
the State agency shall issue a notice of adverse action in accordance 
with Sec. 273.13(a)(2) which informs the household of the ineligibility, 
the reason for the ineligibility, the eligibility and benefit level of 
the remaining members, and the action the household must take to end the 
ineligibility.

[[Page 643]]

    (d) Treatment of income and resources of other nonhousehold members. 
(1) For all other nonhousehold members defined in Sec. 273.1 (b)(1) and 
(b)(2) who are not specifically mentioned in paragraph (c) of this 
section, the income and resources of such individuals shall not be 
considered available to the household with whom the individual resides. 
Cash payments from the nonhousehold member to the household will be 
considered income under the normal income standards set in 
Sec. 273.9(b). Vendor payments, as defined in Sec. 273.9(c)(1), shall be 
excluded as income. If the household shares deductible expenses with the 
nonhousehold member, only the amount actually paid or contributed by the 
household shall be deducted as a household expense. If the payments or 
contributions cannot be differentiated, the expenses shall be prorated 
evenly among persons actually paying or contributing to the expense and 
only the household's pro rata share deducted.
    (2) When the earned income of one or more household members and the 
earned income of a nonhousehold member are combined into one wage, the 
income of the household members shall be determined as follows:
    (i) If the household's share can be identified, the State agency 
shall count that portion due to the household as earned income.
    (ii) If the household's share cannot be identified the State agency 
shall prorate the earned income among all those whom it was intended to 
cover and count that prorated portion to the household.
    (3) Such nonhousehold members shall not be included when determining 
the size of the household for the purposes of:
    (i) Assigning a benefit level to the household;
    (ii) Comparing the household's monthly income with the income 
eligibility standards; or
    (iii) Comparing the household's resources with the resource 
eligibility limits.
    (e) Residents of drug/alcoholic treatment and rehabilitation 
programs. (1) Narcotic addicts or alcoholics who regularly participate 
in publicly operated or private non-profit drug or alcoholic treatment 
and rehabilitation programs on a resident basis may voluntarily apply 
for the Food Stamp Program. Resident addicts and alcoholics shall have 
their eligibility determined as a one-person household. The State agency 
shall certify residents of addict/alcoholic treatment centers by using 
the same provisions that apply to all other applicant households except 
that certification must be accomplished through an authorized 
representative as described in Sec. 273.1(f)(2). Prior to certifying any 
residents for food stamps, the State agency shall verify that the 
treatment center is authorized by FCS as a retailer if the center wishes 
to redeem coupons through a wholesaler or, if it is not authorized by 
FCS as a retailer that it is under part B of title XIX of the Public 
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300x et seq.) (as defined in Drug 
addiction or alcoholic treatment and rehabilitation program in 
Sec. 271.2). The guidelines for issuing FCS authorizations to these 
treatment centers are set forth in Sec. 278.1(e).
    (2) Each treatment and rehabilitation center shall provide the State 
agency with a list of currently participating residents. This list shall 
include a statement signed by a responsible center official attesting to 
the validity of the list. The State agency shall require the list on 
either a monthly or semimonthly basis. In addition, the State agency 
shall conduct periodic random onsite visits to the center to assure the 
accuracy of the list and that the State agency's records are consistent 
and up to date.
    (3) The following provisions apply to residents of treatment 
centers:
    (i) When expedited processing standards as described in 
Sec. 273.2(i) are necessary, eligibility for the initial application 
shall be processed on an expedited basis, and the State agency shall 
complete verification and documentation requirements prior to issuance 
of a second coupon allotment;
    (ii) When normal processing standards apply, the State agency shall 
complete the verification and documentation requirements prior to making 
an eligibility determination for the initial application;
    (iii) The State agency shall process changes in household 
circumstances

[[Page 644]]

and recertifications by using the same standards that apply to all other 
food stamp households; and
    (iv) Resident households shall be afforded the same rights to 
notices of adverse action, to fair hearings, and to entitlement to lost 
benefits as are all other food stamp households.
    (4) The treatment center shall notify the State agency, as provided 
in Sec. 273.12(a), of changes in the household's income or other 
household circumstances and of when the addict or alcoholic leaves the 
treatment center. The treatment center shall return a household's ATP or 
coupons received after the household has left the center.
    (5)(i) When the household leaves the center, the center shall 
provide the resident household with its ID card and any untransacted ATP 
cards. The household, not the center, shall be allowed to sign for and 
receive any remaining authorized benefits reflected on HIR cards. The 
departing household shall also receive its full allotment if already 
issued and if no coupons have been spent on behalf of that individual 
household. These procedures are applicable at any time during the month. 
However, if the coupons have already been issued and any portion spent 
on behalf of the individual, and the household leaves the treatment and 
rehabilitation program prior to the 16th day of the month, the treatment 
center shall provide the household with one half of its monthly coupon 
allotment. If the household leaves on or after the 16th day of the month 
and the coupons have already been issued and used, the household does 
not receive any coupons.
    (ii) Once the household leaves the treatment center, the center is 
no longer allowed to act as that household's authorized representative. 
The center, if possible, shall provide the household with a change 
report form to report to the State agency the household's new address 
and other circumstances after leaving the center and shall advise the 
household to return the form to the appropriate office of the State 
agency within 10 days.
    (iii) The treatment center shall return to the State agency any 
coupons not provided to departing residents at the end of each month. 
These returned coupons shall include those not provided to departing 
residents because they left either prior to the 16th and the center was 
unable to provide the individual with the coupons or they left on or 
after the 16th of the month.
    (6) The organization or institution shall be responsible for any 
misrepresentation or intentional Program violation which it knowingly 
commits in the certification of center residents. As an authorized 
representative, the organization or institution must be knowledgeable 
about household circumstances and should carefully review those 
circumstances with residents prior to applying on their behalf. The 
organization or institution shall be strictly liable for all losses or 
misuse of food coupons held on behalf of resident households and for all 
overissuances which occur while the households are residents of the 
treatment center.
    (7) The organization or institution authorized by FCS as a retail 
food store may be penalized or disqualified, as described in Sec. 278.6, 
if it is determined administratively or judicially that coupons were 
misappropriated or used for purchases that did not contribute to a 
certified household's meals. The State agency shall promptly notify FCS 
when it has reason to believe that an organization or institution is 
misusing coupons in its possession. However, the State agency shall take 
no action prior to FCS action against the organization or institution. 
The State agency shall establish a claim for overissuances of food 
coupons held on behalf of resident clients as stipulated in paragraph 
(e)(6) of this section if any overissuances are discovered during an 
investigation or hearing procedure for redemption violations. If FCS 
disqualifies an organization or institution as an authorized retail food 
store, the State agency shall suspend its authorized representative 
status for the same period.
    (f) Residents of a group living arrangement. (1) Disabled or blind 
residents of a group living arrangement (as defined in Sec. 271.2) may 
voluntarily apply for the Food Stamp Program. If these residents apply 
through the use of the facility's authorized representative, their 
eligibility shall be determined as one-

[[Page 645]]

person households. If the residents apply on their own behalf, the 
household size shall be in accordance with the definition in Sec. 273.1. 
The State agency shall certify these residents using the same provisions 
that apply to all other households. Prior to certifying any residents 
for food stamps, the State agency shall verify that the group living 
arrangement is authorized by FCS or is certified by the appropriate 
agency or agencies of the State (as defined in Sec. 271.2) including 
that agency's (or agencies') determination that the center is a 
nonprofit organization.
    (2) Each group living arrangement shall provide the State agency 
with a list of currently participating residents. This list shall 
include a statement signed by a responsible center official attesting to 
the validity of the list. The State shall require the list on a periodic 
basis. In addition, the State agency shall conduct periodic random 
onsite visits to assure the accuracy of the list and that the State 
agency's records are consistent and up to date.
    (3) The same provisions applicable in Sec. 273.11(e)(3) to residents 
of treatment centers also apply to blind or disabled residents of group 
living arrangements when the facility acts as the resident's authorized 
representative.
    (4) If the resident has made application on his/her own behalf, the 
household is responsible for reporting changes to the State agency as 
provided in Sec. 273.12(a). If the group living arrangement is acting in 
the capacity of an authorized representative, the group living 
arrangement shall notify the State agency, as provided in 
Sec. 273.12(a), of changes in the household's income or other household 
circumstances and when the individual leaves the group living 
arrangement. The group living arrangement shall return any household's 
ATP card or coupons to the State agency if they are received after the 
household has left the group living arrangement.
    (5)(i) When the household leaves the facility, the group living 
arrangement, either acting as an authorized representative or retaining 
use of the coupons on behalf of the residents (regardless of the method 
of application), shall provide residents with their ID cards (if 
applicable) and any untransacted ATP cards. The household, not the group 
living arrangement, shall be allowed to sign for and receive any 
remaining authorized benefits reflected on HIR cards. Also, the 
departing household shall receive its full allotment if issued and if no 
coupons have been spent on behalf of that individual household. These 
procedures are applicable at any time during the month. However, if the 
coupons have already been issued and any portion spent on behalf of the 
individual, and the household leaves the group living arrangement prior 
to the 16th day of the month, the facility shall provide the household 
with its ID card (if applicable) and one half of its monthly coupon 
allotment. If the household leaves on or after the 16th day of the month 
and the coupons have already been issued and used, the household does 
not receive any coupons. If a group of residents have been certified as 
one household and have returned the coupons to the facility to use, the 
departing residents shall be given a pro rata share of one-half of the 
coupon allotment if leaving prior to the 16th day of the month and shall 
be instructed to obtain ID cards or written authorizations to use the 
coupons from the local office.
    (ii) Once the resident leaves, the group living arrangement no 
longer acts as his/her authorized representative. The group living 
arrangement, if possible, shall provide the household with a change 
report form to report to the State agency the individual's new address 
and other circumstances after leaving the group living arrangement and 
shall advise the household to return the form to the appropriate office 
of the State agency within 10 days.
    (iii) The group living arrangement shall return to the State agency 
any coupons not provided to departing residents at the end of each 
month. These returned coupons shall include those not provided to 
departing residents because they left on or after the 16th of the month 
or they left prior to the 16th and the facility was unable to provide 
them with the coupons.
    (6) The same provisions applicable to drug and alcoholic treatment 
center in paragraphs (e) (6) and (7) of this section

[[Page 646]]

also apply to group living arrangements when acting as an authorized 
representative. These provisions, however, are not applicable if a 
resident has applied on his/her own behalf. The resident applying on 
his/her own behalf shall be responsible for overissuances as would any 
other household as discussed in Sec. 273.18.
    (7) The group living arrangement may purchase and prepare food to be 
consumed by eligible residents on a group basis if residents normally 
obtain their meals at a central location as part of the group living 
arrangement services or if meals are prepared at a central location for 
delivery to the individual residents. If residents purchase and/or 
prepare food for home consumption, as opposed to communal dining, the 
group living arrangement shall ensure that each resident's food stamps 
are used for meals intended for that resident. If the resident retains 
use of his/her own coupon allotment, he/she may either use the coupons 
to purchase meals prepared for them by the facility or to purchase food 
to prepare meals for their own consumption.
    (g) Shelters for battered women and children. (1) Prior to 
certifying its residents under this paragraph, the State agency shall 
determine that the shelter for battered women and children meets the 
definition in Sec. 271.2 and document the basis of this determination. 
Shelters having FCS authorization to redeem at wholesalers shall be 
considered as meeting the definition and the State agency is not 
required to make any further determination. The State agency may choose 
to require local project area offices to maintain a list of shelters 
meeting the definition to facilitate prompt certification of eligible 
residents following the special procedures outlined below.
    (2) Many shelter residents have recently left a household containing 
the person who has abused them. Their former household may be certified 
for participation in the Program, and its certification may be based on 
a household size that includes the women and children who have just 
left. Shelter residents who are included in such certified households 
may nevertheless apply for and (if otherwise eligible) participate in 
the Program as separate households if such certified household which 
includes them is the household containing the person who subjected them 
to abuse. Shelter residents who are included in such certified 
households may receive an additional allotment as a separate household 
only once a month.
    (3) Shelter residents who apply as separate households shall be 
certified solely on the basis of their income and resources and the 
expenses for which they are responsible. They shall be certified without 
regard to the income, resources, and expenses of their former household. 
Jointly held resources shall be considered inaccessible in accordance 
with Sec. 273.8. Room payments to the shelter shall be considered as 
shelter expenses.
    (4) Any shelter residents eligible for expedited service shall be 
handled in accordance with Sec. 273.2(i).
    (5) State agencies shall take prompt action to ensure that the 
former household's eligibility or allotment reflects the change in the 
household's composition. Such action shall include either shortening the 
certification period by issuing a notice of expiration in accordance 
with Sec. 273.14(b) to the former household of shelter residents or 
acting on the reported change in accordance with Sec. 273.12 by issuing 
a notice of adverse action in accordance with Sec. 273.13.
    (h) Homeless food stamp households. Homeless food stamp households 
shall be permitted to use their food stamp benefits to purchase prepared 
meals from homeless meal providers authorized by FCS under 
Sec. 278.1(h).
    (i) Prerelease applicants. A household which consists of a resident 
or residents of a public institution(s) which applies for SSI under 
SSA's Prerelease Program for the Institutionalized shall be allowed to 
apply for food stamp benefits jointly with their application for SSI 
prior to their release from the institution. Such households shall be 
certified in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 273.1(e), 
Sec. 273.2(c), (g), (i), (j) and (k), and Sec. 273.10(a), as 
appropriate.
    (j) Households containing sponsored alien members. (1) Definitions. 
``Sponsored alien'' means those aliens lawfully admitted for permanent 
residence into the United States as described in Sec. 273.4(a)(2). 
``Sponsor'' means a person

[[Page 647]]

who executed an affidavit(s) of support or similar agreement on behalf 
of an alien as a condition of the alien's entry or admission into the 
United States as a permanent resident. ``Date of entry'' or ``Date of 
admission'' means the date established by the Immigration and 
Naturalization Service as the date the sponsored alien was admitted for 
permanent residence.
    (2) Deeming of sponsor's income and resources as that of the 
sponsored alien. Portions of the gross income and the resources of a 
sponsor and the sponsor's spouse (if living with the sponsor) shall be 
deemed to be the unearned income and resources of a sponsored alien for 
three years following the alien's admission for permanent residence to 
the United States. The spouse's income and resources will be counted 
even if the sponsor and spouse were married after the signing of the 
agreement.
    (i) The monthly income of the sponsor and sponsor's spouse (if 
living with the sponsor) deemed to be that of the alien shall be the 
total monthly earned and unearned income as defined in Sec. 273.9(b) 
(including the income exclusions provided for in Sec. 273.9(c)) of the 
sponsor and sponsor's spouse at the time the household containing the 
sponsored alien member applies or is recertified for Program 
participation, reduced by: (A) A 20 percent earned income amount for 
that portion of the income determined as earned income of the sponsor 
and the sponsor's spouse; and (B) an amount equal to the Food Stamp 
Program's monthly gross income eligibility limit for a household equal 
in size to the sponsor, the sponsor's spouse, and any other person who 
is claimed or could be claimed by the sponsor or the sponsor's spouse as 
a dependent for Federal income tax purposes.
    (ii) If the alien has already reported gross income information on 
his/her sponsor due to AFDC's sponsored alien rules, that income amount 
may be used for Food Stamp Program deeming purposes. However, allowable 
reductions to be applied to the total gross income of the sponsor and 
the sponsor's spouse prior to attributing an income amount to the alien 
shall be limited to the 20 percent earned income amount and the Food 
Stamp Program's gross monthly income amount provided for in paragraphs 
(j)(2)(i)(A) and (j)(2)(i)(B) of this section.
    (iii) Actual money paid to the alien by the sponsor or the sponsor's 
spouse will not be considered as income to the alien unless the amount 
paid exceeds the amount attributed to the alien under paragraph 
(j)(2)(i) of this section. Only the portion of the amount paid that 
actually exceeds the amount deemed would be considered income to the 
alien in addition to the deemed income amount.
    (iv) Resources of the sponsor and sponsor's spouse to be deemed to 
be that of the alien shall be the total amount of their resources as 
determined in accordance with Sec. 273.8, reduced by $1,500.
    (v) The amount of income and resources deemed to be that of the 
sponsored alien in accordance with paragraphs (j)(2)(i) and (iv) of this 
section, shall be considered in determining the eligibility and benefit 
level of the household of which the alien is a member.
    (vi) If a sponsored alien can demonstrate to the State agency's 
satisfaction that his/her sponsor sponsors other aliens, then the income 
and resources deemed under the provisions of paragraphs (j)(2)(i) and 
(iv) of this section shall be divided by the number of such aliens that 
apply for or are participating in the program.
    (vii) If the alien reports that he/she has changed sponsors during 
the certification period, then deemed income and resources shall be 
recalculated based on the required information about the new sponsor and 
sponsor's spouse as outlined in paragraphs (j)(2)(i) through (j)(2)(iv) 
of this section and the reported change would be handled in accordance 
with the timeframes and procedures outlined in Sec. 273.12 or 
Sec. 273.21, as appropriate. In the event that an alien loses his/her 
sponsor during the three-year limit on the sponsored alien provisions of 
this section and does not obtain another, the deemed income and 
resources of the previous sponsor shall continue to be attributed to the 
alien until such time as the alien obtains another sponsor or until the 
three-year period for applying

[[Page 648]]

the sponsored alien provisions expires, whichever occurs first. However, 
should the alien's sponsor become deceased, the deemed income and 
resources of sponsor shall no longer be attributed to the alien.
    (3) Exempt aliens. The provisions of this paragraph do not apply to:
    (i) An alien who is participating in the Food Stamp Program as a 
member of his/her sponsor's household or an alien whose sponsor is 
participating in the Food Stamp Program separate and apart from the 
alien;
    (ii) An alien who is sponsored by an organization or group as 
opposed to an individual;
    (iii) An alien who is not required to have a sponsor under the 
Immigration and Nationality Act, such as, but not limited to, a refugee, 
a parolee, one granted asylum, and a Cuban or Haitian entrant.
    (4) Sponsored alien's responsibility. For a period of three years 
from the alien's date of entry or date of admission as a lawful 
permanent resident, the alien shall be responsible for obtaining the 
cooperation of his/her sponsor, for providing the State agency at the 
time of application and at the time of recertification with the 
information and/or documentation necessary to calculate deemed income 
and resources in accordance with paragraphs (j)(2)(i) through (j)(2)(iv) 
of this section, and for providing the names (or other identifying 
factors) of other aliens for whom the alien's sponsor has signed an 
agreement to support to enable the State agency to determine how many of 
such other aliens are Food Stamp Program applicants or participants and 
initiate the proration provisions in paragraph (j)(2)(vi) of this 
section. If such information about other aliens for whom the sponsor is 
responsible is not provided to the State agency, the deemed income and 
resource amounts calculated shall be attributed to the applicant alien 
in their entirety until such time as the information is provided. The 
alien shall also be responsible for reporting the required information 
about the sponsor and sponsor's spouse should the alien obtain a 
different sponsor during the certification period and for reporting a 
change in income should the sponsor or the sponsor's spouse change or 
lose employment or become deceased during the certification period. Such 
changes shall be handled in accordance with the timeliness standards and 
procedures described in Secs. 273.12 and 273.21, as appropriate.
    (5) State agency responsibilities. (i) The State agency shall obtain 
the following information from the alien at the time of the household's 
initial application and at the time the household applies for 
recertification:
    (A) The income and resources of the alien's sponsor and the 
sponsor's spouse (if living with the sponsor).
    (B) The names or other identifying factors (such as an alien 
registration number) of other aliens for whom the sponsor has signed an 
affidavit of support or similar agreement to enable the State agency to 
fulfill the requirements of paragraph (j)(2)(vi) of this section.
    (C) The provision of the Immigration and Nationality Act under which 
the alien was admitted.
    (D) The date of the alien's entry or admission as a lawful permanent 
resident as established by INS.
    (E) The alien's date of birth, place of birth, and alien 
registration number.
    (F) The number of dependents who are claimed or could be claimed as 
dependents by the sponsor or the sponsor's spouse for Federal income tax 
purposes.
    (G) The name, address and phone number of the alien's sponsor.
    (ii) The State agency shall verify income information obtained in 
accordance with paragraphs (j)(4) and (j)(5)(i) of this section. The 
State agency shall verify all other information obtained in accordance 
with paragraphs (j)(4) and (j)(5)(i) of this section if questionable and 
which affects household eligibility and benefit levels in accordance 
with the procedures established in Sec. 273.2(f). State agencies shall 
assist aliens in obtaining verification in accordance with the 
provisions of Sec. 273.2(f)(5).
    (6) Awaiting verification. While the State agency is awaiting 
receipt and/or verification from the alien of information necessary to 
carry out the provisions of paragraph (j)(2) of this section, the 
sponsored alien shall be ineligible

[[Page 649]]

until such time as all necessary facts are obtained. The eligibility of 
any remaining household members shall be determined. The income and 
resources of the ineligible alien (excluding the deemed income and 
resources of the alien's sponsor and sponsor's spouse) shall be 
considered available in determining the eligibility and benefit level of 
the remaining household members in accordance with paragraph (c) of this 
section. If the sponsored alien refuses to cooperate in providing and/or 
verifying needed information, other adult members of the alien's 
household shall be responsible for providing and/or verifying 
information required in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 273.2(d). 
If the information and/or verification is subsequently received, the 
State agency shall act on the information as a reported change in 
household membership in accordance with the timeliness standards in 
Sec. 273.12 or Sec. 273.21, as appropriate. If the same sponsor is 
responsible for the entire household, the entire household is ineligible 
until such time as needed sponsor information is provided and/or 
verified. State agencies shall assist aliens in obtaining verification 
in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 273.2(f)(5).
    (7) Memorandum of agreement. The Secretary shall enter into an 
agreement with the Secretary of State and the Attorney General whereby 
they shall inform any sponsor of an alien and the alien, at the time the 
sponsor executes an affidavit of support or similar agreement on behalf 
of an alien, of the requirements of section 1308 of Pub. L. 97-98. Under 
the agreement the Bureau of Consular Affairs of the State Department and 
local INS offices shall provide information to State agencies that is 
needed to carry out the provisions of this paragraph. This agreement 
shall set forth the specific information that must be released by all 
parties to facilitate identification of the alien and sponsor and enable 
State agencies to perform required verification of information supplied 
by the alien which is essential for eligibility determinations, as 
specified in paragraph (j)(5) of this section.
    (8) Overissuance due to incorrect sponsor information. (i) Any 
sponsor of an alien and alien shall be jointly and severably liable for 
repayment of any overissuance of coupons as a result of incorrect 
information provided by the sponsor. However, if the alien's sponsor had 
good cause or was without fault for supplying the incorrect information, 
the alien's household shall be solely liable for repayment of the 
overissuance. The State agency shall establish procedures for 
determining good cause under this provision, and shall include such 
procedures in its State Plan of Operation.
    (ii) Where the sponsor did not have good cause, the State agency 
shall decide whether to establish a claim for the overissuance against 
the sponsor or the alien's household, or both. The State agency may 
choose to establish claims against both parties at the same time or to 
establish a claim against the party it deems most likely to repay first. 
If a claim is established against the alien's sponsor first, the State 
agency shall ensure that a claim is established against the alien's 
household whenever the sponsor fails to respond to the State agency's 
demand letter within 30 days of receipt. The State agency shall return 
to the alien's sponsor and/or the alien's household any amounts repaid 
in excess of the total amount of the claim.
    (iii) Collecting claims against sponsors. (A) State agencies shall 
initiate collection action by sending the alien's sponsor a written 
demand letter which informs the sponsor of the amount owed, the reason 
for the claim, and how the sponsor may pay the claim. The sponsor shall 
also be informed that the sponsor will not be held responsible for 
repayment of the claim if the sponsor can demonstrate that he/she had 
good cause or was without fault for the incorrect information having 
been supplied to the State agency. In addition, the State agency shall 
follow-up the written demand letter with personal contact, if possible. 
The sponsor is entitled to a fair hearing either to contest a 
determination that the sponsor was at fault where it was determined that 
incorrect information has been provided or to contest the amount of the 
claim.
    (B) The State agency may pursue other collection actions, as 
appropriate, to obtain payment of a claim

[[Page 650]]

against any sponsor which fails to respond to a written demand letter. 
The State agency may terminate collection action against a sponsor at 
any time if it has documentation that the sponsor cannot be located or 
when the cost of further collection is likely to exceed the amount that 
can be recovered.
    (C) If the alien's sponsor responds to the written demand letter and 
is financially able to pay the claim at one time, the State agency shall 
collect a lumpsum cash payment. The State agency may negotiate a payment 
schedule with the sponsor for repayment of the claim, as long as 
payments are provided in regular installments. Payments shall be 
submitted to FCS in accordance with the procedures specified in 
Sec. 273.18(h). For submission to FCS, any funds collected from the 
sponsor shall be reported and the State agency's retention shall be 
based on whether the corresponding claim against the alien's household 
is being treated as an inadvertent household error claim or intentional 
misrepresentation or fraud claim.
    (iv) Collecting claims against alien households. Prior to initiating 
collection action against the household of a sponsored alien for 
repayment of an overissuance caused by incorrect information concerning 
the alien's sponsor or sponsor's spouse, the State agency shall 
determine whether such incorrect information was supplied due to 
inadvertent household error or an act of intentional Program violation 
on the part of the alien. If sufficient documentary evidence exists to 
substantiate that the incorrect information was provided in an act of 
intentional Program violation on the part of the alien, the State agency 
shall pursue the case in accordance with Sec. 273.16 for intentional 
Program violation disqualifications. The claim against the alien's 
household shall be handled as an inadvertent household error claim prior 
to the determination of intentional Program violation by an 
administrative disqualification hearing official or a court of 
appropriate jurisdiction. If the State agency determines that the 
incorrect information was supplied due to misunderstanding or unintended 
error on the part of the sponsored alien, the claim shall be handled as 
an inadvertent household error claim in accordance with Sec. 273.18. 
These actions shall be taken regardless of the current eligibility of 
the sponsored alien or the alien's household.
    (k) Failure to comply with another assistance program's 
requirements. A State agency shall not increase food stamp benefits when 
a household's benefits received under another means-tested Federal, 
State or local welfare or public assistance program, which is governed 
by welfare or public assistance laws or regulations and which 
distributes public funds, have been decreased (reduced, suspended or 
terminated) due to an intentional failure to comply with a requirement 
of the program that imposed the benefit decrease. This provision does 
not apply in the case of individuals or households subject to a food 
stamp work sanction imposed pursuant to 7 CFR 273.7(g)(2). State agency 
procedures shall adhere to the following minimum conditions:
    (1) This provision must be applied to all applicable cases. If a 
State agency is not successful in obtaining the necessary cooperation 
from another Federal, State or local means-tested welfare or public 
assistance program to enable it to comply with the requirements of this 
provision, the State agency shall not be held responsible for 
noncompliance as long as the State agency has made a good faith effort 
to obtain the information.
    (2) A State agency shall not reduce, suspend or terminate a 
household's current food stamp allotment amount when the household's 
benefits under another applicable assistance program have been decreased 
due to an intentional failure to comply with a requirement of that 
program.
    (3) A State agency must adjust food stamp benefits when eligible 
members are added to the food stamp household regardless of whether or 
not the household is prohibited from receiving benefits for the 
additional member under another Federal, State or local welfare or 
public assistance means-tested program.
    (4) Changes in household circumstances which are not related to a 
penalty imposed by another Federal,

[[Page 651]]

State or local welfare or public assistance means-tested program shall 
not be affected by this provision.

[Amdt. 132, 43 FR 47889, Oct. 17, 1978]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting 
Sec. 273.11, see the List of CFR Sections Affected in the Finding Aids 
section of this volume.


<R05>
Sec. 273.12  Reporting changes.

    (a) Household responsibility to report. (1) Certified households are 
required to report the following changes in circumstances:
    (i) Changes in the sources of income or in the amount of gross 
monthly income of more than $25, except changes in the public assistance 
grant, or the general assistance grant in project areas where GA and 
food stamp cases are jointly processed in accord with Sec. 273.2(j)(2). 
Since the State agency has prior knowledge of all changes in the public 
assistance grant and general assistance grants, action shall be taken on 
the State agency information;
    (ii) All changes in household composition, such as the addition or 
loss of a household member;
    (iii) Changes in residence and the resulting change in shelter 
costs;
    (iv) The acquisition of a licensed vehicle not fully excludable 
under Sec. 273.8(e); and
    (v) When cash on hand, stocks, bonds, and money in a bank account or 
savings institution reach or exceed a total of $2,000.
    (vi) Changes in the legal obligation to pay child support.
    (2) Certified households shall report changes within 10 days of the 
date the change becomes known to the household. Optional procedures for 
reporting changes are contained in Sec. 273.12(f) for households in 
States with FCS-approved forms for jointly reporting food stamp and 
public assistance changes and food stamp and general assistance changes.
    (3) An applying household shall report all changes related to its 
food stamp eligibility and benefits at the certification interview. 
Changes, as provided in paragraph (a)(1) of this section, which occur 
after the interview but before the date of the notice of eligibility, 
shall be reported by the household within 10 days of the date of the 
notice.
    (4) The State agency may require a household that is eligible to 
receive a child support deduction in accordance with Sec. 273.9(d)(7) to 
report information required by the State agency regarding child support 
on a change report, a monthly report, or quarterly report. The State 
agency shall process the reports in accordance with procedures for the 
systems used in budgeting the household's income and deductions. The 
following requirements apply to quarterly reports:
    (i) The State agency shall provide the household a reasonable period 
after the end of the last month covered by the report in which to return 
the report. If the household does not file the report by the due date or 
files an incomplete report, the State agency shall provide the household 
with a reminder notice advising the household that it has 10 days from 
the date the State agency mails the notice to file a complete report. If 
the household does not file a complete report by the extended filing 
date as specified in the reminder notice, the State agency shall 
determine the household's eligibility and benefits without consideration 
of the child support deduction. The State agency shall not terminate the 
benefits of a household for failure to submit a quarterly report unless 
the household is otherwise ineligible. The State agency shall send the 
household an adequate notice as defined in Sec. 271.2 of this chapter if 
the household fails to submit a complete report or if the information 
contained on a complete report results in a reduction or termination of 
benefits. The quarterly report shall meet the requirements specified in 
paragraph (b) of this section. The State agency may combine the content 
of the reminder notice and the adequate notice as long as the notice 
meets the requirements of the individual notices.
    (ii) The quarterly report form, if required, shall be the sole 
reporting requirement for reporting child support payments during the 
certification period. Households excluded from monthly reporting as 
specified in Sec. 273.21(b) and households required to submit monthly 
reports shall not be required to submit quarterly reports.

[[Page 652]]

    (5) State agencies shall not impose any food stamp reporting 
requirements on households except as provided in paragraph (a) of this 
section.
    (b) Report forms. (1) The State agency shall provide the household 
with a form for reporting the changes required in paragraph (a)(1) of 
this section to be reported within 10 days and shall pay the postage for 
return of the form. The change report form shall, at a minimum, include 
the following:
    (i) A space for the household to report whether the change shall 
continue beyond the report month;
    (ii) The civil and criminal penalties for violations of the Act in 
understandable terms and in prominent and boldface lettering;
    (iii) A reminder to the household of its right to claim actual 
utility costs if its costs exceed the standard;
    (iv) The number of the food stamp office and a toll-free number or a 
number where collect calls will be accepted for households outside the 
local calling area; and
    (v) A statement describing the changes in household circumstances 
contained in Sec. 273.12(a)(1) that must be reported and a statement 
which clearly informs the household that it is required to report these 
changes.
    (2) A quarterly report form for reporting changes in the child 
support obligation and payments shall be written in clear, simple 
language and meet the bilingual requirements described in Sec. 272.4(b) 
of this chapter. The report shall meet the requirements of 
Sec. 273.21(h)(2)(iii) through (h)(2)(vii).
    (3) Changes reported over the telephone or in person by the 
household shall be acted on in the same manner as those reported on the 
change report form.
    (4) A change report form shall be provided to newly certified 
households at the time of certification, at recertification if the 
household needs a new form; and a new form shall be sent to the 
household whenever a change report form is returned by the household. A 
change report may be provided to households more often at the State 
agency's option.
    (c) State agency action on changes. The State agency shall take 
prompt action on all changes to determine if the change affects the 
household's eligibility or allotment. However, during the certification 
period, the State agency shall not act on changes in the medical 
expenses of households eligible for the medical expense deduction which 
it learns of from a source other than the household and which, in order 
to take action, require the State agency to contact the household for 
verification. The State agency shall only act on those changes in 
medical expenses that it learns about from a source other than the 
household if those changes are verified upon receipt and do not 
necessitate contact with the household. Even if there is no change in 
the allotment, the State agency shall document the reported change in 
the casefile, provide another change report form to the household, and 
notify the household of the receipt of the change report. If the 
reported change affects the household's eligibility or level of 
benefits, the adjustment shall also be reported to the household. The 
State agency shall also advise the household of additional verification 
requirements, if any, and state that failure to provide verification 
shall result in increased benefits reverting to the original allotment. 
The State agency shall document the date a change is reported, which 
shall be the date the State agency receives a report form or is advised 
of the change over the telephone or by a personal visit. Restoration of 
lost benefits shall be provided to any household if the State agency 
fails to take action on a change which increases benefits within the 
time limits specified in paragraph (c)(1) of this section.
    (1) Increase in benefits. (i) For changes which result in an 
increase in a household's benefits, other than changes described in 
paragraph (c)(1)(ii) of this section, the State agency shall make the 
change effective no later than the first allotment issued 10 days after 
the date the change was reported to the State agency. For example, a $30 
decrease in income reported on the 15th of May would increase the 
household's June allotment. If the same decrease were reported on May 
28, and the household's normal issuance cycle was on June 1, the 
household's allotment would have to be increased by July.

[[Page 653]]

    (ii) For changes which result in an increase in a household's 
benefits due to the addition of a new household member who is not a 
member of another certified household, or due to a decrease of $50 or 
more in the household's gross monthly income, the State agency shall 
make the change effective not later than the first allotment issued 10 
days after the date the change was reported. However, in no event shall 
these changes take effect any later than the month following the month 
in which the change is reported. Therefore, if the change is reported 
after the 20th of a month and it is too late for the State agency to 
adjust the following month's allotment, the State agency shall issue a 
supplementary ATP or otherwise provide an opportunity for the household 
to obtain the increase in benefits by the 10th day of the following 
month, or the household's normal issuance cycle in that month, whichever 
is later. For example, a household reporting a $100 decrease in income 
at any time during May would have its June allotment increased. If the 
household reported the change after the 20th of May and it was too late 
for the State agency to adjust the ATP normally issued on June 1, the 
State agency would issue a supplementary ATP for the amount of the 
increase by June 10.
    (iii) The State agency may elect to verify changes which result in 
an increase in a household's benefits in accordance with the 
verification requirements of Sec. 273.2(f)(8)(ii), prior to taking 
action on these changes. If the State agency elects this option, it must 
allow the household 10 days from the date the change is reported to 
provide verification required by Sec. 273.2(f)(8)(ii). If the household 
provides verification within this period, the State shall take action on 
the changes within the timeframes specified in paragraphs (c)(1) (i) and 
(ii) of this section. The timeframes shall run from the date the change 
was reported, not from the date of verification. If, however, the 
household fails to provide the required verification within 10 days 
after the change is reported but does provide the verification at a 
later date, then the timeframes specified in paragraphs (c)(1) (i) and 
(ii) of this section for taking action on changes shall run from the 
date verification is provided rather than from the date the change is 
reported. If the State agency does not elect this option, verification 
required by Sec. 273.2(f)(8)(ii) must be obtained prior to the issuance 
of the second normal monthly allotment after the change is reported. If 
in these circumstances the household does not provide verification, the 
household's benefits will revert to the original benefit level. Whenever 
a State agency increases a household's benefits to reflect a reported 
change and subsequent verification shows that the household was actually 
eligible for fewer benefits, the State agency shall establish a claim 
for the overissuance in accordance with Sec. 273.18. In cases where the 
State agency has determined that a household has refused to cooperate as 
defined in Sec. 273.2(d), the State agency shall terminate the 
household's eligibility following the notice of adverse action.
    (2) Decreases in benefits. (i) If the household's benefit level 
decreases or the household becomes ineligible as a result of the change, 
the State agency shall issue a notice of adverse action within 10 days 
of the date the change was reported unless one of the exemptions to the 
notice of adverse action in Sec. 273.13 (a)(3) or (b) applies. When a 
notice of adverse action is used, the decrease in the benefit level 
shall be made effective no later than the allotment for the month 
following the month in which the notice of adverse action period has 
expired, provided a fair hearing and continuation of benefits have not 
been requested. When a notice of adverse action is not used due to one 
of the exemptions in Sec. 273.13 (a)(3) or (b), the decrease shall be 
made effective no later than the month following the change. 
Verification which is required by Sec. 273.2(f) must be obtained prior 
to recertification.
    (ii) The State agency may suspend a household's certification 
prospectively for one month if the household becomes temporarily 
ineligible because of a periodic increase in recurring income or other 
change not expected to continue in the subsequent month. If the 
suspended household again becomes eligible, the State agency shall issue

[[Page 654]]

benefits to the household on the household's normal issuance date. If 
the suspended household does not become eligible after one month, the 
State agency shall terminate the household's certification. Households 
are responsible for reporting changes as required by paragraph (a) of 
this section during the period of suspension.
    (d) Failure to report. If the State agency discovers that the 
household failed to report a change as required by paragraph (a) of this 
section and, as a result, received benefits to which it was not 
entitled, the State agency shall file a claim against the household in 
accordance with Sec. 273.18. If the discovery is made within the 
certification period, the household is entitled to a notice of adverse 
action if the household's benefits are reduced. A household shall not be 
held liable for a claim because of a change in household circumstances 
which it is not required to report in accordance with Sec. 273.12(a)(1). 
Individuals shall not be disqualified for failing to report a change, 
unless the individual is disqualified in accordance with the 
disqualification procedures specified in Sec. 273.16.
    (e) Mass changes. Certain changes are initiated by the State or 
Federal government which may affect the entire caseload or significant 
portions of the caseload. These changes include, but are not limited to, 
adjustments to the income eligibility standards, the shelter and 
dependent care deductions, the maximum food stamp allotment and the 
standard deduction; annual and seasonal adjustments to State utility 
standards; periodic cost-of-living adjustments to Retirement, Survivors, 
and Disability Insurance (RSDI), Supplemental Security Income (SSI) and 
other Federal benefits; periodic adjustments to Aid to Families with 
Dependent Children (AFDC) or General Assistance (GA) payments; and other 
changes in the eligibility and benefit criteria based on legislative or 
regulatory changes.
    (1) Federal adjustments to eligibility standards, allotments, and 
deductions, and State adjustments to utility standards. (i) State 
agencies shall implement these changes for all households at a specific 
point in time. Adjustments to Federal standards shall be implemented 
prospectively regardless of the household's budgeting system. Annual and 
seasonal adjustments in State utility standards shall also be 
implemented prospectively for all households.
    (A) Adjustments in the maximum food stamp allotment shall be 
effective in accordance with Sec. 273.10(e)(4)(ii).
    (B) Adjustments in the standard deduction shall be effective in 
accordance with Sec. 273.9(d)(7).
    (C) Adjustments in the shelter deduction shall be effective in 
accordance with Sec. 273.9(d)(8).
    (D) Adjustments in the income eligibility standards shall be 
effective in accordance with Sec. 273.9(a)(3).
    (ii) A notice of adverse action shall not be used for these changes. 
At a minimum, the State agencies shall publicize these mass changes 
through the news media; posters in certification offices, issuance 
locations, or other sites frequented by certified households; or general 
notices mailed to households. At its option, the State agency may send 
the notice described in paragraph (e)(4) of this section or some other 
type of written explanation of the change. A household whose 
certification period overlaps a seasonal variation in the State utility 
standard shall be advised at the time of initial certification of when 
the adjustment will occur and what the variation in the benefit level 
will be, if known.
    (2) Mass changes in public assistance and general assistance. (i) 
When the State agency makes an overall adjustment to public assistance 
(PA) payments, corresponding adjustments in households' food stamp 
benefits shall be handled as a mass change in accordance with the 
procedures in paragraphs (e) (4), (5) and (6) of this section. When the 
State agency has at least 30 days, advance knowledge of the amount of 
the PA adjustment, the State agency shall make the change in benefits 
effective in the same month as the PA change. If the State agency does 
not have sufficient notice, the food stamp change shall be effective no 
later than the month following the month in which the PA change was 
made.
    (ii) State agencies which also administer a general assistance (GA) 
program shall handle mass adjustments to GA

[[Page 655]]

payments in accordance with the schedules outlined in paragraph 
(e)(2)(i) and the procedures in paragraphs (e) (4), (5) and (6) of this 
section. However, where State agencies do not administer both programs, 
mass changes in GA payments shall be subject to the schedule in 
paragraph (e)(3) and the procedures in paragraphs (e) (4), (5) and (6) 
of this section.
    (3) Mass changes in Federal benefits. The State agency shall 
establish procedures for making mass changes to reflect cost-of-living 
adjustments (COLAs) in benefits and any other mass changes under RSDI, 
SSI, and other programs such as veteran's assistance under title 38 of 
the United States Code and the Black Lung Program, where information on 
COLA's is readily available and is applicable to all or a majority of 
those programs' beneficiaries. Households on retrospective budgeting but 
not monthly reporting shall have the change reflected in accordance with 
the State's system. Monthly reporting households shall report the change 
on the appropriate monthly report but are not required to report these 
types of changes outside the monthly report. The State agency shall 
handle such information provided on the monthly report in accordance 
with its normal procedures. Households not subject to monthly reporting 
shall not be responsible for reporting these changes. The State agency 
shall be responsible for automatically adjusting a household's food 
stamp benefit level. The change shall be reflected no later than the 
second allotment issued to nonmonthly reporting households issued after 
the month in which the change becomes effective.
    (4) Notice for Mass Changes. When the State agency makes a mass 
change in food stamp eligibility or benefits by simultaneously 
converting the caseload or that portion of the caseload that is 
affected, or by conducting individual desk reviews in place of a mass 
change, it shall notify all households whose benefits are reduced or 
terminated in accordance with the requirements of this paragraph, except 
for mass changes made under Sec. 273.12(e)(1); and
    (i) At a minimum, the State agency shall inform the household of:
    (A) The general nature of the change;
    (B) Examples of the change's effect on households' allotments;
    (C) The month in which the change will take effect;
    (D) The household's right to a fair hearing;
    (E) The household's right to continue benefits and under what 
circumstances benefits will be continued pending a fair hearing;
    (F) General information on whom to contact for additional 
information; and
    (G) The liability the household will incur for any overissued 
benefits if the fair hearing decision is adverse.
    (ii) At a minimum, the State agency shall notify the household of 
the mass change or the result of the desk review on the date the 
household is scheduled to receive the allotment which has been changed.
    (iii) In addition, the State shall notify the household of the mass 
change as much before the household's scheduled issuance date as 
reasonably possible, although the notice need not be given any earlier 
than the time required for advance notice of adverse action.
    (5) Fair hearings. The household shall be entitled to request a fair 
hearing when it is aggrieved by the mass change.
    (6) Continuation of benefits. A household which requests a fair 
hearing due to a mass change shall be entitled to continued benefits at 
its previous level only if the household meets three criteria;
    (i) The household does not specifically waive its right to a 
continuation of benefits;
    (ii) The household requests a fair hearing in accordance with 
Sec. 273.13(a)(1); and
    (iii) The household's fair hearing is based upon improper 
computation of food stamp eligibility or benefits, or upon 
misapplication or misinterpretation of Federal law or regulation.
    (f) PA and GA households. (1) Except as provided in paragraph (f)(2) 
of this section, PA households have the same reporting requirements as 
any other food stamp household. PA households which report a change in 
circumstances to the PA worker shall be considered to have reported the 
change

[[Page 656]]

for food stamp purposes. All of the requirements pertaining to reporting 
changes for PA households shall be applied to GA households in project 
areas where GA and food stamp cases are processed jointly in accordance 
with provisions of Sec. 273.2(j)(3).
    (2)(i) State agencies may use a joint change reporting form for 
households to report changes for both PA and food stamp purposes. 
Whenever a joint change reporting form is used, the State agency shall 
insure that adjustments are made in a household's eligibility status or 
allotment for the months determined appropriate given the household's 
budgeting cycle.
    (ii) State agencies may combine the use of a joint PA/food stamp 
change reporting form with a PA reporting system that demands the 
regular submission of reports, such as a monthly reporting system. The 
State agency shall insure that the procedures in Sec. 273.21(h) are 
followed.
    (3) Households shall be notified whenever their benefits are altered 
as a result of changes in the PA benefits or whenever the food stamp 
certification period is shortened to reflect changes in the household's 
circumstances. If the certification period is shortened, the household's 
certification period shall not end any earlier than the month following 
the month in which the State agency determines that the certification 
period should be shortened, allowing adequate time for the State agency 
to send a notice of expiration and for the household to timely reapply. 
If the PA benefits are terminated but the household is still eligible 
for food stamp benefits, members of the household shall be advised of 
food stamp work registration requirements, if applicable, as their WIN 
registration exemption no longer applies.
    (4) Whenever a change results in the reduction or termination of a 
household's PA benefits within its food stamp certification period, and 
the State agency has sufficient information to determine how the change 
affects the household's food stamp eligibility and benefit level, the 
State agency shall take the following actions:
    (i) If a change in household circumstances requires both a reduction 
or termination in the PA payment and a reduction or termination in food 
stamp benefits, the State agency shall issue a single notice of adverse 
action for both the PA and food stamp actions. If the household requests 
a fair hearing within the period provided by the notice of adverse 
action, the household's food stamp benefits shall be continued on the 
basis authorized immediately prior to sending the notice. If the fair 
hearing is requested for both programs' benefits, the hearing shall be 
conducted according to PA procedures and timeliness standards. However, 
the household must reapply for food stamp benefits if the food stamp 
certification period expires before the fair hearing process is 
completed. If the household does not appeal, the change shall be made 
effective in accordance with the procedures specified in paragraph (c) 
of this section.
    (ii) If the household's food stamp benefits will be increased as a 
result of the reduction or termination of PA benefits, the State agency 
shall issue the PA notice of adverse action, but shall not take any 
action to increase the household's food stamp benefits until the 
household decides whether it will appeal the adverse action. If the 
household decides to appeal and its PA benefits are continued, the 
household's food stamp benefits shall continue at the previous basis. If 
the household does not appeal, the State agency shall make the change 
effective in accordance with the procedures specified in paragraph (c) 
of this section, except that the time limits for the State agency to act 
on changes which increase a household's benefits shall be calculated 
from the date the PA notice of adverse action period expires.
    (5) Whenever a change results in the termination of a household's PA 
benefits within its food stamp certification period, and the State 
agency does not have sufficient information to determine how the change 
affects the household's food stamp eligibility and benefit level (such 
as when an absent parent returns to a household, rendering the household 
categorically ineligible for public assistance, and the State agency 
does not have any information on the income of the new household 
member), the State agency shall not terminate

[[Page 657]]

the household's food stamp benefits but shall instead take the following 
action:
    (i) Where a PA notice of adverse action has been sent, the State 
agency shall wait until the household's notice of adverse action period 
expires or until the household requests a fair hearing, whichever occurs 
first. If the household requests a fair hearing and its PA benefits are 
continued pending the appeal, the household's food stamp benefits shall 
be continued at the same basis.
    (ii) If a PA notice of adverse action is not required, or the 
household decides not to request a fair hearing and continuation of its 
PA benefits, the State agency shall send the household a notice of 
expiration which informs the household that its certification period 
will expire at the end of the month following the month the notice of 
expiration is sent and that it must reapply if it wishes to continue to 
participate. The notice of expiration shall also explain to the 
household that its certification period is expiring because of changes 
in its circumstances which may affect its food stamp eligibility and 
benefit level.

[Amdt. 132, 43 FR 47889, Oct. 17, 1978]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting 
Sec. 273.12, see the List of CFR Sections Affected in the Finding Aids 
section of this volume.


<R05>
Sec. 273.13  Notice of adverse action.

    (a) Use of notice. Prior to any action to reduce or terminate a 
household's benefits within the certification period, the State agency 
shall, except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, provide the 
household timely and adequate advance notice before the adverse action 
is taken.
    (1) The notice of adverse action shall be considered timely if the 
advance notice period conforms to that period of time defined by the 
State agency as an adequate notice period for its public assistance 
caseload, provided that the period includes at least 10 days from the 
date the notice is mailed to the date upon which the action becomes 
effective. Also, if the adverse notice period ends on a weekend or 
holiday, and a request for a fair hearing and continuation of benefits 
is received the day after the weekend or holiday, the State agency shall 
consider the request timely received.
    (2) The notice of adverse action shall be considered adequate if it 
explains in easily understandable language: The proposed action; the 
reason for the proposed action; the household's right to request a fair 
hearing; the telephone number of the food stamp office (toll-free number 
or a number where collect calls will be accepted for households outside 
the local calling area) and, if possible, the name of the person to 
contact for additional information; the availability of continued 
benefits; and the liability of the household for any overissuances 
received while awaiting a fair hearing if the hearing official's 
decision is adverse to the household. If there is an individual or 
organization available that provides free legal representation, the 
notice shall also advise the household of the availability of the 
service.
    (3) The State agency may notify a household that its benefits will 
be reduced or terminated, no later than the date the household receives, 
or would have received, its allotment, if the following conditions are 
met:
    (i) The household reports the information which results in the 
reduction or termination.
    (ii) The reported information is in writing and signed by the 
household.
    (iii) The State agency can determine the household's allotment or 
ineligibility based solely on the information provided by the household 
as required in paragraph (a)(3)(ii) of this section.
    (iv) The household retains its right to a fair hearing as allowed in 
Sec. 273.15.
    (v) The household retains its right to continued benefits if the 
fair hearing is requested within the time period set by the State agency 
in accordance with Sec. 273.13(a)(1).
    (vi) The State agency continues the household's previous benefit 
level, if required, within five working days of the household's request 
for a fair hearing.
    (b) Exemptions from notice. Individual notices of adverse action 
shall not be provided when:
    (1) The State initiates a mass change as described in 
Sec. 273.12(e).

[[Page 658]]

    (2) The State agency determines, based on reliable information, that 
all members of a household have died.
    (3) The State agency determines, based on reliable information, that 
the household has moved from the project area.
    (4) The household has been receiving an increased allotment to 
restore lost benefits, the restoration is complete, and the household 
was previously notified in writing of when the increased allotment would 
terminate.
    (5) The household's allotment varies from month to month within the 
certification period to take into account changes which were anticipated 
at the time of certification, and the household was so notified at the 
time of certification.
    (6) The household jointly applied for PA/GA and food stamp benefits 
and has been receiving food stamp benefits pending the approval of the 
PA/GA grant and was notified at the time of certification that food 
stamp benefits would be reduced upon approval of the PA/GA grant.
    (7) A household member is disqualified for intentional Program 
violation, in accordance with Sec. 273.16, or the benefits of the 
remaining household members are reduced or terminated to reflect the 
disqualification of that household member. The notice requirements for 
individuals or households affected by intentional Program violation 
disqualifications are explained in Sec. 273.16.
    (8) The State agency has elected to assign a longer certification 
period to a household certified on an expedited basis and for whom 
verification was postponed, provided the household has received written 
notice that the receipt of benefits beyond the month of application is 
contingent on its providing the verification which was initially 
postponed and that the State agency may act on the verified information 
without further notice as provided in Sec. 273.2(i)(4).
    (9) The State agency must change the household's benefits back to 
the original benefit level as required in Sec. 273.12(c)(1)(iii).
    (10) Converting a household from cash and/or food stamp coupon 
repayment to benefit reduction as a result of failure to make agreed 
upon repayment as discussed in Sec. 273.18.
    (11) The State agency is terminating the eligibility of a resident 
of a drug or alcoholic treatment center or a group living arrangement if 
the facility loses either its certification from the appropriate agency 
or agencies of the State (as defined in Sec. 271.2) or has its status as 
an authorized representative suspended due to FCS disqualifying it as a 
retailer. However, residents of group living arrangements applying on 
their own behalf are still eligible to participate.
    (12) The household voluntarily requests, in writing or in the 
presence of a caseworker, that its participation be terminated. If the 
household does not provide a written request, the State agency shall 
send the household a letter confirming the voluntary withdrawal. Written 
confirmation does not entail the same rights as a notice of adverse 
action except that the household may request a fair hearing.
    (13) The State agency determines, based on reliable information, 
that the household will not be residing in the project area and, 
therefore, will be unable to obtain its next allotment. The State agency 
shall inform the household of its termination no later than its next 
scheduled issuance date. While the State agency may inform the household 
before its next issuance date, the State agency shall not delay 
terminating the household's participation in order to provide advance 
notice.
    (14) The State agency initiates recoupment of a claim as specified 
in Sec. 273.18(g)(4) against a household which has previously received a 
notice of adverse action with respect to such claim.
    (c) Optional notice. The State agency may, at its option, send the 
household an adequate notice as provided in paragraph (b)(3) of this 
section when the household's address is unknown and mail directed to it 
has been returned by the post office indicating no known forwarding 
address.

[Amdt. 132, 43 FR 47889, Oct. 17, 1978]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting 
Sec. 273.13, see the List of CFR Sections Affected in the Finding Aids 
section of this volume.

[[Page 659]]


<R05>
Sec. 273.14  Recertification.

    (a) General. No household may participate beyond the expiration of 
the certification period assigned in accordance with Sec. 273.10(f) 
without a determination of eligibility for a new period. The State 
agency must establish procedures for notifying households of expiration 
dates, providing application forms, scheduling interviews, and 
recertifying eligible households prior to the expiration of 
certification periods. Households must apply for recertification and 
comply with interview and verification requirements.
    (b) Recertification process. (1) Notice of expiration. (i) The State 
agency shall provide households certified for one month or certified in 
the second month of a two-month certification period a notice of 
expiration (NOE) at the time of certification. The State agency shall 
provide other households the NOE before the first day of the last month 
of the certification period, but not before the first day of the next-
to-the-last month. Jointly processed PA and GA households need not 
receive a separate food stamp notice if they are recertified for food 
stamps at the same time as their PA or GA redetermination.
    (ii) Each State agency shall develop a NOE. A model form (Form FCS-
439) is available from FCS. The NOE must contain the following:
    (A) The date the certification period expires;
    (B) The date by which a household must submit an application for 
recertification in order to receive uninterrupted benefits;
    (C) The consequences of failure to apply for recertification in a 
timely manner;
    (D) Notice of the right to receive an application form upon request 
and to have it accepted as long as it contains a signature and a legible 
name and address;
    (E) Information on alternative submission methods available to 
households which cannot come into the certification office or do not 
have an authorized representative and how to exercise these options;
    (F) The address of the office where the application must be filed;
    (G) The household's right to request a fair hearing if the 
recertification is denied or if the household objects to the benefit 
issuance;
    (H) Notice that any household consisting only of Supplemental 
Security Income (SSI) applicants or recipients is entitled to apply for 
food stamp recertification at an office of the Social Security 
Administration;
    (I) Notice that failure to attend an interview may result in delay 
or denial of benefits; and
    (J) Notice that the household is responsible for rescheduling a 
missed interview and for providing required verification information.
    (iii) To expedite the recertification process, State agencies are 
encouraged to send a recertification form, an interview appointment 
letter, and a statement of needed verification required by 
Sec. 273.2(c)(5) with the NOE.
    (2) Application form. (i) The State agency shall provide each 
household with an application form to obtain all information needed to 
determine eligibility and benefits for a new certification period. The 
State agency may use either its regular application as defined in 
Sec. 273.2(b) or a special recertification form. The recertification 
form can only be used by households which are applying for 
recertification before the end of their current certification period. 
Recertification forms must be approved by FCS as required by 
Sec. 273.2(b)(3). Recertification forms used for joint food stamps/SSI 
processing must be approved by SSA in accordance with 
Sec. 273.2(k)(1)(i)(B). The recertification form must elicit from the 
household sufficient information regarding household composition, income 
and resources that, when added to information already contained in the 
casefile, will ensure an accurate determination of eligibility and 
benefits. The information required by Sec. 273.2(b)(1)(i),(b)(1)(ii), 
(b)(1)(iii), (b)(1)(iv) and (b)(1)(v) must be included on the 
recertification form. The information regarding the Income and 
Eligibility Verification System in Sec. 273.2(b)(2) may be provided on a 
separate form. A combined form for PA and GA households may be used in 
accordance with Sec. 273.2(j). Monthly reporting households shall be 
recertified as provided in Sec. 273.21(q). State agencies may

[[Page 660]]

use the same form for households required to report changes in 
circumstances and monthly reporting households.
    (ii) The State agency may request that the household bring the 
application form to the interview or return the form by a specified date 
(not less than 15 days after receipt of the form).
    (3) Interview. (i) As part of the recertification process, the State 
agency shall conduct a face-to-face interview with a member of each 
household. The face-to-face interview may be waived in accordance with 
Sec. 273.2(e). The State agency may also waive the face-to-face 
interview for a household that has no earned income if all of its 
members are elderly or disabled. The State agency has the option of 
conducting a telephone interview or a home visit for those households 
for whom the office interview is waived. However, a household that 
requests a face-to-face interview must be granted one.
    (ii) If a household receives PA/GA and will be recertified for food 
stamps more than once in a 12-month period, the State agency may choose 
to conduct a face-to-face interview with that household only once during 
that period. The face-to-face interview shall be conducted at the same 
time that the household receives a face-to-face interview for PA/GA 
purposes. At any other recertification during that year period, the 
State agency may interview the household by telephone, conduct a home 
visit, or recertify the household by mail.
    (iii) The State agency may schedule the interview prior to the 
application filing date, provided that the household's application is 
not denied at that time for failure to appear for the interview. The 
State agency shall schedule the interview on or after the date the 
application was filed if the interview has not been previously 
scheduled, or the household has failed to appear for any interviews 
scheduled prior to this time and has requested another interview. State 
agencies shall schedule interviews so that the household has at least 10 
days after the interview in which to provide verification before the 
certification period expires.
    (4) Verification. Information provided by the household shall be 
verified in accordance with Sec. 273.2(f)(8)(i). The State agency shall 
provide the household a notice of required verification as provided in 
Sec. 273.2(c)(5) and notify the household of the date by which the 
verification requirements must be satisfied. The household must be 
allowed a minimum of 10 days to provide required verification 
information. Any household whose eligibility is not determined by the 
end of its current certification period due to the time period allowed 
for submitting any missing verification shall receive an opportunity to 
participate, if eligible, within 5 working days after the household 
submits the missing verification.
    (c) Timely application for recertification. (1) Households reporting 
required changes in circumstances that are certified for one month or 
certified in the second month of a two-month certification period shall 
have 15 days from the date the NOE is received to file a timely 
application for recertification.
    (2) Other households reporting required changes in circumstances 
that submit applications by the 15th day of the last month of the 
certification period shall be considered to have made a timely 
application for recertification.
    (3) For monthly reporting households, the filing deadline shall be 
either the 15th of the last month of the certification period or the 
normal date for filing a monthly report, at the State agency's option. 
The option chosen must be uniformly applied to the State agency's entire 
monthly reporting caseload.
    (4) For households consisting only of SSI applicants or recipients 
who apply for food stamp recertification at SSA offices in accordance 
with Sec. 273.2(k)(1), an application shall be considered filed for 
normal processing purposes when the signed application is received by 
the SSA.
    (d) Timely processing. (1) Households that were certified for one 
month or certified for two months in the second month of the 
certification period and have met all required application procedures 
shall be notified of their eligibility or ineligibility. Eligible 
households shall be provided an opportunity

[[Page 661]]

to receive benefits no later than 30 calendar days after the date the 
household received its last allotment.
    (2) Other households that have met all application requirements 
shall be notified of their eligibility or ineligibility by the end of 
their current certification period. In addition, the State agency shall 
provide households that are determined eligible an opportunity to 
participate by the household's normal issuance cycle in the month 
following the end of its current certification period.
    (e) Delayed processing. (1) Delays caused by the State agency. 
Households which have submitted an application for recertification in a 
timely manner but, due to State agency error, are not determined 
eligible in sufficient time to provide for issuance of benefits by the 
household's next normal issuance date shall receive an immediate 
opportunity to participate upon being determined eligible, and the 
allotment shall not be prorated. If the household was unable to 
participate for the month following the expiration of the certification 
period because of State agency error, the household is entitled to 
restored benefits.
    (2) Delays caused by the household. (i) If a household does not 
submit a new application by the end of the certification period, the 
State agency must close the case without further action.
    (ii) If a recertification form is submitted more than one month 
after the timely filing deadline, it shall be treated the same as an 
application for initial certification. In accordance with 
Sec. 273.10(a)(1)(ii), the household's benefits shall not be prorated 
unless there has been a break of more than one month in the household's 
certification.
    (iii) A household which submits an application by the filing 
deadline but does not appear for an interview scheduled after the 
application has been filed, or does not submit verification within the 
required timeframe, loses its right to uninterrupted benefits. The State 
agency has three options for handling such cases:
    (A) Send the household a denial notice as soon as the household 
either fails to appear for an interview or fails to submit verification 
information within the required timeframe. If the interview is 
completed, or the household provides the required verification 
information within 30 days of the date of application and is determined 
eligible, the household must be reinstated and receive benefits within 
30 calendar days after the application was filed or within 10 days of 
the date the interview is completed or required verification information 
is provided, whichever is later. In no event shall a subsequent period's 
benefits be provided before the end of the current certification period.
    (B) Deny the household's recertification application at the end of 
the last month of the current certification period. The State agency may 
on a Statewide basis either require households to submit new 
applications to continue benefits or reinstate the households without 
requiring new applications if the households have been interviewed and 
have provided the required verification information within 30 days after 
the applications have been denied.
    (C) Deny the household's recertification request 30 days after 
application. The State agency may on a Statewide basis either require 
households to submit new applications to continue benefits or reinstate 
households without requiring new applications if such households have 
been interviewed and have provided the required verification within 30 
days after the applications have been denied.
    (f) Expedited service. A State agency is not required to apply the 
expedited service provisions of Sec. 273.2(i) at recertification if the 
household applies for recertification before the end of its current 
certification period.

[Amdt. 364, 61 FR 54318, Oct. 17, 1996]

    Effective Date Note: At 61 FR 54318, Oct. 17, 1996, 
Sec. 278.14(b)(2) was revised. This section contains information 
collection and recordkeeping requirements and will not become effective 
until approval has been given by the Office of Management and Budget. 
The Food and Consumer Service will publish a document in the Federal 
Register announcing the effective date.


<R05>
Sec. 273.15  Fair hearings.

    (a) Availability of hearings.  Except as provided in Sec. 271.7(f), 
each State agency shall provide a fair hearing to any household 
aggrieved by any action of

[[Page 662]]

the State agency which affects the participation of the houshold in the 
Program.
    (b) Hearing system. Each State agency shall provide for either a 
fair hearing at the State level or for a hearing at the local level 
which permits the household to further appeal a local decision to a 
State level fair hearing. State agencies may adopt local level hearings 
in some project areas and maintain only State level hearings in other 
project areas.
    (c) Timely action on hearings--(1) State level hearings. Within 60 
days of receipt of a request for a fair hearing, the State agency shall 
assure that the hearing is conducted, a decision is reached, and the 
household and local agency are notified of the decision. Decisions which 
result in an increase in household benefits shall be reflected in the 
coupon allotment within 10 days of the receipt of the hearing decision 
even if the State agency must provide a supplementary ATP or otherwise 
provide the household with an opportunity to obtain the allotment 
outside of the normal issuance cycle. However, the State agency may take 
longer than 10 days if it elects to make the decision effective in the 
household's normal issuance cycle, provided that the issuance will occur 
within 60 days from the household's request for the hearing. Decisions 
which result in a decrease in household benefits shall be reflected in 
the next scheduled issuance following receipt of the hearing decision.
    (2) Local level hearings. Within 45 days of receipt of a request for 
a fair hearing, the State agency shall assure that the hearing is 
conducted, and that a decision is reached and reflected in the coupon 
allotment.
    (3) Appeals of local level decisions. Within 45 days of receipt of 
any request for a State level review of a decision or for a new State 
level hearing, the State agency shall assure that the review or the new 
hearing is conducted, and that a decision is reached and reflected in 
the coupon allotment.
    (4) Household requests for postponement. The household may request 
and is entitled to receive a postponement of the scheduled hearing. The 
postponement shall not exceed 30 days and the time limit for action on 
the decision may be extended for as many days as the hearing is 
postponed. For example, if a State level hearing is postponed by the 
household for 10 days, notification of the hearing decision will be 
required within 70 days from the date of the request for a hearing.
    (d) Agency conferences. (1) The State agency shall offer agency 
conferences to households which wish to contest a denial of expedited 
service under the procedures in Sec. 273.2(i). The State agency may also 
offer agency conferences to households adversely affected by an agency 
action. The State agency shall advise households that use of an agency 
conference is optional and that it shall in no way delay or replace the 
fair hearing process. The agency conferences may be attended by the 
eligibility worker responsible for the agency action, and shall be 
attended by an eligibility supervisor and/or the agency director, and by 
the household and/or its representative. An agency conference may lead 
to an informal resolution of the dispute. However, a fair hearing must 
still be held unless the household makes a written withdrawal of its 
request for a hearing.
    (2) An agency conference for households contesting a denial of 
expedited service shall be scheduled within 2 working days, unless the 
household requests that it be scheduled later or states that it does not 
wish to have an agency conference.
    (e) Consolidated hearings. State agencies may respond to a series of 
individual requests for hearings by conducting a single group hearing. 
State agencies may consolidate only cases where individual issues of 
fact are not disputed and where related issues of State and/or Federal 
law, regulation or policy are the sole issues being raised. In all group 
hearings, the regulations governing individual hearings must be 
followed. Each individual household shall be permitted to present its 
own case or have its case presented by a representative.
    (f) Notification of right to request hearing. At the time of 
application, each household shall be informed in writing of its right to 
a hearing, of the method by which a hearing may be requested, and that 
its case may be presented by

[[Page 663]]

a household member or a representative, such as a legal counsel, a 
relative, a friend or other spokesperson. In addition, at any time the 
household expresses to the State agency that it disagrees with a State 
agency action, it shall be reminded of the right to request a fair 
hearing. If there is an individual or organization available that 
provides free legal representation, the household shall also be informed 
of the availability of that service.
    (g) Time period for requesting hearing. A household shall be allowed 
to request a hearing on any action by the State agency or loss of 
benefits which occurred in the prior 90 days. Action by the State agency 
shall include a denial of a request for restoration of any benefits lost 
more than 90 days but less than a year prior to the request. In 
addition, at any time within a certification period a household may 
request a fair hearing to dispute its current level of benefits.
    (h) Request for hearing. A request for a hearing is defined as a 
clear expression, oral or written, by the household or its 
representative to the effect that it wishes to appeal a decision or that 
an opportunity to present its case to a higher authority is desired. If 
it is unclear from the household's request what action it wishes to 
appeal, the State agency may request the household to clarify its 
grievance. The freedom to make a request for a hearing shall not be 
limited or interfered with in any way.
    (i) State agency responsibilities on hearing requests. (1) Upon 
request, the State agency shall make available without charge the 
specific materials necessary for a household or its representative to 
determine whether a hearing should be requested or to prepare for a 
hearing. If the individual making the request speaks a language other 
than English and the State agency is required by Sec. 272.4(c)(3) to 
provide bilingual staff or interpreters who speak the appropriate 
language, the State agency shall insure that the hearing procedures are 
verbally explained in that language. Upon request, the State agency 
shall also help a household with its hearing request. If a household 
makes an oral request for a hearing, the State agency shall complete the 
procedures necessary to start the hearing process. Households shall be 
advised of any legal services available that can provide representation 
at the hearing.
    (2) The State agency shall expedite hearing requests from 
households, such as migrant farmworkers, that plan to move from the 
jurisdiction of the hearing official before the hearing decision would 
normally be reached. Hearing requests from these households shall be 
processed faster than others if necessary to enable them to receive a 
decision and a restoration of benefits if the decision so indicates 
before they leave the area.
    (3) The State agency shall publish clearly written uniform rules of 
procedure that conform to these regulations and shall make the rules 
available to any interested party. At a minimum, the uniform rules of 
procedure shall include the time limits for hearing requests as 
specified in paragraph (g) of this section, advance notification 
requirements as specified in paragraph (i)(1) of this section, hearing 
timeliness standards as specified in paragraph (c) of this section, and 
the rights and responsibilities of persons requesting a hearing as 
specified in paragraph (p) of this section.
    (j) Denial or dismissal of request for hearing. The State agency 
shall not deny or dismiss a request for a hearing unless:
    (1) The request is not received within the time period specified in 
paragraph (g) of this section;
    (2) The request is withdrawn in writing by the household or its 
representative; or
    (3) The household or its representative fails, without good cause, 
to appear at the scheduled hearing.
    (k) Continuation of benefits. (1) If a household requests a fair 
hearing within the period provided by the notice of adverse action, as 
set forth in Sec. 273.13, and its certification period has not expired, 
the household's participation in the program shall be continued on the 
basis authorized immediately prior to the notice of adverse action, 
unless the household specifically waives continuation of benefits. The 
form for requesting a fair hearing shall contain space for the household 
to indicate whether

[[Page 664]]

or not continued benefits are requested. If the form does not positively 
indicate that the household has waived continuation of benefits, the 
State agency shall assume that continuation of benefits is desired and 
the benefits shall be issued accordingly. If the State agency action is 
upheld by the hearing decision, a claim against the household shall be 
established for all overissuances. If a hearing request is not made 
within the period provided by the notice of adverse action, benefits 
shall be reduced or terminated as provided in the notice. However, if 
the household establishes that its failure to make the request within 
the advance notice period was for good cause, the State agency shall 
reinstate the benefits to the prior basis. When benefits are reduced or 
terminated due to a mass change, participation on the prior basis shall 
be reinstated only if the issue being contested is that food stamp 
eligibility or benefits were improperly computed or that Federal law or 
regulation is being misapplied or misinterpreted by the State agency.
    (2) Once continued or reinstated, benefits shall not be reduced or 
terminated prior to the receipt of the official hearing decision unless:
    (i) The certification period expires. The household may reapply and 
may be determined eligible for a new certification period with a benefit 
amount as determined by the State agency;
    (ii) The hearing official makes a preliminary determination, in 
writing and at the hearing, that the sole issue is one of Federal law or 
regulation and that the household's claim that the State agency 
improperly computed the benefits or misinterpreted or misapplied such 
law or regulation is invalid;
    (iii) A change affecting the household's eligibility or basis of 
issuance occurs while the hearing decision is pending and the household 
fails to request a hearing after the subsequent notice of adverse 
action; or
    (iv) A mass change affecting the household's eligibility or basis of 
issuance occurs while the hearing decision is pending.
    (3) The State agency shall promptly inform the household in writing 
if benefits are reduced or terminated pending the hearing decision.
    (l) Notification of time and place of hearing. The time, date, and 
place of the hearing shall be arranged so that the hearing is accessible 
to the household. At least 10 days prior to the hearing, advance written 
notice shall be provided to all parties involved to permit adequate 
preparation of the case. However, the household may request less advance 
notice to expedite the scheduling of the hearing. The notice shall:
    (1) Advise the household or its representative of the name, address, 
and phone number of the person to notify in the event it is not possible 
for the household to attend the scheduled hearing.
    (2) Specify that the State agency will dismiss the hearing request 
if the household or its representative fails to appear for the hearing 
without good cause.
    (3) Include the State agency hearing procedures and any other 
information that would provide the household with an understanding of 
the proceedings and that would contribute to the effective presentation 
of the household's case.
    (4) Explain that the household or representative may examine the 
case file prior to the hearing.
    (m) Hearing official. Hearings shall be conducted by an impartial 
official(s) who: Does not have any personal stake or involvement in the 
case; was not directly involved in the initial determination of the 
action which is being contested; and was not the immediate supervisor of 
the eligibility worker who took the action. State level hearings shall 
be conducted by State level personnel and shall not be conducted by 
local level personnel.
    (1) Designation of hearing official. The hearing official shall be:
    (i) An employee of the State agency;
    (ii) An individual under contract with the State agency;
    (iii) An employee of another public agency designated by the State 
agency to conduct hearings;
    (iv) A member or official of a statutory board or other legal entity 
designated by the State agency to conduct hearings; or

[[Page 665]]

    (v) An executive officer of the State agency, a panel of officials 
of the State agency or a person or persons expressly appointed to 
conduct State level hearings or to review State and/or local level 
hearing decisions.
    (2) Power and duties. The hearing official shall:
    (i) Administer oaths or affirmations if required by the State;
    (ii) Insure that all relevant issues are considered;
    (iii) Request, receive and make part of the record all evidence 
determined necessary to decide the issues being raised;
    (iv) Regulate the conduct and course of the hearing consistent with 
due process to insure an orderly hearing;
    (v) Order, where relevant and useful, an independent medical 
assessment or professional evaluation from a source mutually 
satisfactory to the household and the State agency;
    (vi) Provide a hearing record and recommendation for final decision 
by the hearing authority; or, if the hearing official is the hearing 
authority, render a hearing decision in the name of the State agency, in 
accordance with paragraph (q) of this section, which will resolve the 
dispute.
    (n) Hearing authority. The hearing authority shall be the person 
designated to render the final administrative decision in a hearing. The 
same person may act as both the hearing official and the hearing 
authority. The hearing authority shall be subject to the requirements 
specified in paragraph (m) of this section.
    (o) Attendance at hearing. The hearing shall be attended by a 
representative of the State agency and by the household and/or its 
representative. The hearing may also be attended by friends or relatives 
of the household if the household so chooses. The hearing official shall 
have the authority to limit the number of persons in attendance at the 
hearing if space limitations exist.
    (p) Household rights during hearing. The household may not be 
familiar with the rules of order and it may be necessary to make 
particular efforts to arrive at the facts of the case in a way that 
makes the household feel most at ease. The household or its 
representative must be given adequate opportunity to:
    (1) Examine all documents and records to be used at the hearing at a 
reasonable time before the date of the hearing as well as during the 
hearing. The contents of the case file including the application form 
and documents of verification used by the State agency to establish the 
household's ineligibility or eligibility and allotment shall be made 
available, provided that confidential information, such as the names of 
individuals who have disclosed information about the household without 
its knowledge or the nature or status of pending criminal prosecutions, 
is protected from release. If requested by the household or its 
representative, the State agency shall provide a free copy of the 
portions of the case file that are relevant to the hearing. Confidential 
information that is protected from release and other documents or 
records which the household will not otherwise have an opportunity to 
contest or challenge shall not be introduced at the hearing or affect 
the hearing official's decision.
    (2) Present the case or have it presented by a legal counsel or 
other person.
    (3) Bring witnesses.
    (4) Advance arguments without undue interference.
    (5) Question or refute any testimony or evidence, including an 
opportunity to confront and cross-examine adverse witnesses.
    (6) Submit evidence to establish all pertinent facts and 
circumstances in the case.
    (q) Hearing decisions. (1) Decisions of the hearing authority shall 
comply with Federal law and regulations and shall be based on the 
hearing record. The verbatim transcript or recording of testimony and 
exhibits, or an official report containing the substance of what 
transpired at the hearing, together with all papers and requests filed 
in the proceeding, shall constitute the exclusive record for a final 
decision by the hearing authority. This record shall be retained in 
accordance with Sec. 272.1(f). This record shall also be available to 
the household or its representative at any reasonable time for copying 
and inspection.

[[Page 666]]

    (2) A decision by the hearing authority shall be binding on the 
State agency and shall summarize the facts of the case, specify the 
reasons for the decision, and identify the supporting evidence and the 
pertinent Federal regulations. The decision shall become a part of the 
record.
    (3) The household and the local agency shall each be notified in 
writing of: The decision; the reasons for the decision in accordance 
with paragraph (q)(2) of this section; the available appeal rights; and 
that the household's benefits will be issued or terminated as decided by 
the hearing authority. The notice shall also state that an appeal may 
result in a reversal of the decision. The following are additional 
notice requirements and the available appeal rights:
    (i) After a State level hearing decision which upholds the State 
agency action, the household shall be notified of the right to pursue 
judicial review of the decision. In addition, in States which provide 
for rehearings of State level decisions, the household shall be notified 
of the right to pursue a rehearing.
    (ii) After a local level hearing decision which upholds the State 
agency action, the household shall be notified of the right to request a 
completely new State agency level hearing, and that a reversal of the 
decision may result in the restoration of lost benefits to the 
household. In addition, the household shall be advised that if a new 
hearing would pose an inconvenience to the household, a State level 
review of the decision based on the hearing record may be requested 
instead of a new hearing. A clear description of the two appeal 
procedures must be included to enable the household to make an informed 
choice, if it wishes to appeal. If the household indicates that it 
wishes to appeal, but does not select the method, the State agency shall 
proceed with a new State level hearing.
    (4) If the household wishes to appeal a local level hearing 
decision, the appeal request must be filed within 15 days of the mailing 
date of the hearing decision notice. Within 45 days of receipt of any 
request for a State level review of the decision or for a new State 
level hearing, the State agency shall assure that the review or the 
hearing is conducted, and that a decision is reached and reflected in 
the coupon allotment. If a new hearing will not be held, the State level 
hearing official will review the local level hearing record to determine 
if the local decision was supported by substantial evidence. State level 
review procedures shall provide for notifying the local agency and the 
household that each may file a summary of arguments which shall become a 
part of the record if timely received. Both parties shall be advised 
that failure to file a summary will not be considered in deciding the 
case and that the summary must be postmarked within 10 days of receipt 
of the notice.
    (5) All State agency hearing records and decisions shall be 
available for public inspection and copying, subject to the disclosure 
safeguards provided in Sec. 272.1(c), and provided identifying names and 
addresses of household members and other members of the public are kept 
confidential.
    (r) Implementation of local level hearing decision. (1) In the event 
the local hearing decision upholds the State agency action, any benefits 
to the household which were continued pending the hearing shall be 
discontinued beginning with the next scheduled issuance, regardless of 
whether or not an appeal is filed. Collection action for any claims 
against the household for overissuances shall be postponed until the 15-
day appeal request period has elapsed, or if an appeal is requested, 
until the State agency upholds the decision of the local hearing 
authority.
    (2) In the event the local hearing authority decides in favor of the 
household, benefits to the household shall begin or be reinstated, as 
required by the decision, within the 45-day time limit allowed for local 
hearing procedures. Any lost benefits due to the household shall be 
issued as soon as administratively feasible. The State agency shall 
restore benefits to households which are leaving the project area before 
the departure whenever possible. If benefits are not restored prior to 
the household's departure, the State agency shall forward an 
authorization to the benefits to the household

[[Page 667]]

or to the new project area if this information is known. The new project 
area shall accept an authorization and issue the appropriate benefits 
whether the notice is presented by the household or received directly 
from another project area.
    (s) Implementation of final State agency decisions. The State agency 
is responsible for insuring that all final hearing decisions are 
reflected in the household's coupon allotment within the time limits 
specified in paragraph (c) of this section.
    (1) When the hearing authority determines that a household has been 
improperly denied program benefits or has been issued a lesser allotment 
than was due, lost benefits shall be provided to the household in 
accordance with Sec. 273.17. The State agency shall restore benefits to 
households which are leaving the project area before the departure 
whenever possible. If benefits are not restored prior to the household's 
departure, the State agency shall forward an authorization to the 
benefits to the household or to the new project area if this information 
is known. The new project area shall accept an authorization and issue 
the appropriate benefits whether the notice is presented by the 
household or received directly from another project area.
    (2) When the hearing authority upholds the State agency's action, a 
claim against the household for any overissuances shall be prepared in 
accordance with Sec. 273.18.
    (t) Review of appeals of local level decisions. State agencies which 
adopt a local level hearing system shall establish a procedure for 
monitoring local level hearing decisions. The number of local level 
decisions overturned upon appeal to a State level hearing shall be 
examined. If the number of reversed decisions is excessive, the State 
agency shall take corrective action.
    (u) Departmental review of decisions contrary to Federal law and 
regulations. [Reserved]

[Amdt. 132, 43 FR 47889, Oct. 17, 1978, as amended by Amdt. 132, 44 FR 
33385, June 8, 1979; Amdt. 146, 46 FR 1427, Jan. 6, 1981; Amdt. 269, 51 
FR 10793, Mar. 28, 1986; Amdt. 356, 59 FR 29713, June 9, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 273.16  Disqualification for intentional Program violation.

    (a) Administrative responsibility. (1) The State agency shall be 
responsible for investigating any case of alleged intentional Program 
violation, and ensuring that appropriate cases are acted upon either 
through administrative disqualification hearings or referral to a court 
of appropriate jurisdiction in accordance with the procedures outlined 
in this section. Administrative disqualification procedures or referral 
for prosecution action should be initiated by the State agency in cases 
in which the State agency has sufficient documentary evidence to 
substantiate that an individual has intentionally made one or more acts 
of intentional Program violation as defined in paragraph (c) of this 
section. If the State agency does not initiate administrative 
disqualification procedures or refer for prosecution a case involving an 
overissuance caused by a suspected act of intentional Program violation, 
the State agency shall take action to collect the overissuance by 
establishing an inadvertent household error claim against the household 
in accordance with the procedures in Sec. 273.18. The State agency 
should conduct administrative disqualification hearings in cases in 
which the State agency believes the facts of the individual case do not 
warrant civil or criminal prosecution through the appropriate court 
system, in cases previously referred for prosecution that were declined 
by the appropriate legal authority, and in previously referred cases 
where no action was taken within a reasonable period of time and the 
referral was formally withdrawn by the State agency. The State agency 
shall not initiate an administrative disqualification hearing against an 
accused individual whose case is currently being referred for 
prosecution or subsequent to any action taken against the accused 
individual by the prosecutor or court of appropriate jurisdiction, if 
the factual issues of the case arise out of the same, or related, 
circumstances. The State agency may initiate administrative 
disqualification procedures or refer a case for prosecution regardless 
of the current eligibility of the individual. For those

[[Page 668]]

persons not currently certified to participate in the Program at the 
time of the administrative disqualification or court decision, the 
disqualification period shall take effect immediately after the 
individual applies for and is determined eligible for Program benefits.
    (2) Each State agency shall establish a system for conducting 
administrative disqualifications for intentional Program violation which 
conforms with the procedures outlined in paragraph (e) of this section. 
FCS shall exempt any State agency from the requirement to establish an 
administrative disqualification system if the State agency has already 
entered into an agreement, pursuant to paragraph (g)(1) of this section, 
with the State's Attorney General's Office or, where necessary, with 
county prosecutors. FCS shall also exempt any State agency from the 
requirement to establish an administrative disqualification system if 
there is a State law that requires the referral of such cases for 
prosecution and if the State agency demonstrates to FCS that it is 
actually referring cases for prosecution and that prosecutors are 
following up on the State agency's referrals. FCS may require a State 
agency to establish an administrative disqualification system if it 
determines that the State agency is not promptly or actively pursuing 
suspected intentional Program violation claims through the courts.
    (3) The State agency shall base administrative disqualifications for 
intentional Program violations on the determinations of hearing 
authorities arrived at through administrative disqualification hearings 
in accordance with paragraph (e) of this section or on determinations 
reached by courts of appropriate jurisdiction in accordance with 
paragraph (g) of this section. However, any State agency has the option 
of allowing accused individuals either to waive their rights to 
administrative disqualification hearings in accordance with paragraph 
(f) of this section or to sign disqualification consent agreements for 
cases of deferred adjudication in accordance with paragraph (h) of this 
section. Any State agency which chooses either of these options may base 
administrative disqualifications for intentional Program violation on 
the waived right to an administrative disqualification hearing or on the 
signed disqualification consent agreement in cases of deferred 
adjudication.
    (b) Disqualification penalties. (1) Individuals found to have 
committed an intentional Program violation either through an 
administrative disqualification hearing or by a Federal, State or local 
court, or who have signed either a waiver of right to an administrative 
disqualification hearing or a disqualification consent agreement in 
cases referred for prosecution, shall be ineligible to participate in 
the Program:
    (i) For a period of six months for the first intentional Program 
violation, except as provided under paragraphs (b)(2) and (b)(3) of this 
section;
    (ii) For a period of twelve months upon the second occasion of any 
intentional Program violation, except as provided in paragraphs (b)(2) 
and (b)(3) of this section; and
    (iii) Permanently for the third occasion of any intentional Program 
violation.
    (2) Individuals found by a Federal, State or local court to have 
used or received coupons in a transaction involving the sale of a 
controlled substance (as defined in section 102 of the Controlled 
Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802)) shall be ineligible to participate in 
the Program:
    (i) For a period of twelve months upon the first occasion of such 
violation; and
    (ii) Permanently upon the second occasion of such violation.
    (3) Individuals found by a Federal, State or local court to have 
used or received coupons in a transaction involving the sale of 
firearms, ammunition or explosives shall be permanently ineligible to 
participate in the Program upon the first occasion of such violation.
    (4) The penalties in paragraphs (b)(2) and (b)(3) of this section 
shall also apply in cases of deferred adjudication as described in 
paragraph (h) of this section, where the court makes a finding that the 
individual engaged in the conduct described in paragraph (b)(2) or 
(b)(3) of this section.

[[Page 669]]

    (5) If a court fails to impose a disqualification or a 
disqualification period for any intentional Program violation, the State 
agency shall impose the appropriate disqualification penalty specified 
in paragraphs (b)(1), (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section unless it is 
contrary to the court order.
    (6) One or more intentional Program violations which occurred prior 
to April 1, 1983 shall be considered as only one previous 
disqualification when determining the appropriate penalty to impose in a 
case under consideration.
    (7) Regardless of when an action taken by an individual which caused 
an intentional Program violation occurred, the disqualification periods 
specified in paragraphs (b)(2) and (b)(3) of this section shall apply to 
any case in which the court makes the requisite finding on or after 
September 1, 1994.
    (8) State agencies shall disqualify only the individual found to 
have committed the intentional Program violation, or who signed the 
waiver of the right to an administrative disqualification hearing or 
disqualification consent agreement in cases referred for prosecution, 
and not the entire household.
    (9) Even though only the individual is disqualified, the household, 
as defined in Sec. 273.1, is responsible for making restitution for the 
amount of any overpayment. All intentional Program violation claims 
shall be established and collected in accordance with the procedures set 
forth in Sec. 273.18.
    (c) Definition of intentional Program violation. For purposes of 
determining through administrative disqualification hearings whether or 
not a person has committed an intentional Program violation, intentional 
Program violations shall consist of having intentionally: (1) Made a 
false or misleading statement, or misrepresented, concealed or withheld 
facts, or (2) committed any act that constitutes a violation of the Food 
Stamp Act, the Food Stamp Program Regulations, or any State statute 
relating to the use, presentation, transfer, acquisition, receipt, or 
possession of food stamp coupons or ATP's.
    (d) Notification to applicant households. The State agency shall 
inform the household in writing of the disqualification penalties for 
intentional Program violation each time it applies for Program benefits. 
The penalties shall be in clear, prominent, and boldface lettering on 
the application form.
    (e) Disqualification hearings. The State agency shall conduct 
administrative disqualification hearings for individuals accused of 
intentional Program violation in accordance with the requirements 
outlined in this section.
    (1) Consolidation of administrative disqualification hearing with 
fair hearing. The State agency may combine a fair hearing and an 
administrative disqualification hearing into a single hearing if the 
factual issues arise out of the same, or related, circumstances and the 
household receives prior notice that hearings will be combined. If the 
disqualification hearing and fair hearing are combined, the State agency 
shall follow the timeframes for conducting disqualification hearings. If 
the hearings are combined for the purpose of settling the amount of the 
claim at the same time as determining whether or not intentional Program 
violation has occurred, the household shall lose its right to a 
subsequent fair hearing on the amount of the claim. However, the State 
agency shall, upon household request, allow the household to waive the 
30-day advance notice period required by paragraph (e)(3)(i) of this 
section when the disqualification hearing and fair hearing are combined.
    (2) Disqualification hearing procedures. (i) State agencies have the 
option of using the same hearing officials for disqualification hearings 
and fair hearings or designating hearing officials to conduct only 
disqualification hearings.
    (ii) The provisions of Sec. 273.15 (m), (n), (o), (p), and (q)(1) 
are also applicable for disqualification hearings.
    (iii) At the disqualification hearing, the hearing official shall 
advise the household member or representative that they may refuse to 
answer questions during the hearing.
    (iv) Within 90 days of the date the household member is notified in 
writing that a State or local hearing initiated by the State agency has 
been scheduled, the State agency shall conduct the hearing, arrive at a 
decision and notify the household member and local agency of the 
decision. The

[[Page 670]]

household member or representative is entitled to a postponement of the 
scheduled hearing, provided that the request for postponement is made at 
least 10 days in advance of the date of the scheduled hearing. However, 
the hearing shall not be postponed for more than a total of 30 days and 
the State agency may limit the number of postponements to one. If the 
hearing is postponed, the above time limits shall be extended for as 
many days as the hearing is postponed.
    (v) The State agency shall publish clearly written rules of 
procedure for disqualification hearings, and shall make these procedures 
available to any interested party.
    (3) Advance notice of hearing. (i) The State agency shall provide 
written notice to the individual suspected of committing an intentional 
Program violation at least 30 days in advance of the date a 
disqualification hearing initiated by the State agency has been 
scheduled. If mailed, the notice shall be sent either first class mail 
or certified mail-return receipt requested. The notice may also be 
provided by any other reliable method. If the notice is sent using first 
class mail and is returned as undeliverable, the hearing may still be 
held.
    (ii) If no proof of receipt is obtained, a timely (as defined in 
paragraph (e)(4) of this section) showing of nonreceipt by the 
individual due to circumstances specified by the State agency shall be 
considered good cause for not appearing at the hearing. Each State 
agency shall establish the circumstances in which non-receipt 
constitutes good cause for failure to appear. Such circumstances shall 
be consistent throughout the State agency.
    (iii) The notice shall contain at a minimum:
    (A) The date, time, and place of the hearing;
    (B) The charge(s) against the individual;
    (C) A summary of the evidence, and how and where the evidence can be 
examined;
    (D) A warning that the decision will be based solely on information 
provided by the State agency if the individual fails to appear at the 
hearing;
    (E) A statement that the individual or representative will, upon 
receipt of the notice, have 10 days from the date of the scheduled 
hearing to present good cause for failure to appear in order to receive 
a new hearing;
    (F) A warning that a determination of intentional Program violation 
will result in disqualification periods as determined by paragraph (b) 
of this section, and a statement of which penalty the State agency 
believes is applicable to the case scheduled for a hearing;
    (G) A listing of the individual's rights as contained in 
Sec. 273.15(p);
    (H) A statement that the hearing does not preclude the State or 
Federal Government from prosecuting the individual for the intentional 
Program violation in a civil or criminal court action, or from 
collecting any overissuance(s); and
    (I) If there is an individual or organization available that 
provides free legal representation, the notice shall advise the affected 
individual of the availability of the service.
    (iv) A copy of the State agency's published hearing procedures shall 
be attached to the 30-day advance notice or the advance notice shall 
inform the individual of his/her right to obtain a copy of the State 
agency's published hearing procedures upon request.
    (v) Each State agency shall develop an advance notice form which 
contains the information required by this section.
    (4) Scheduling of hearing. The time and place of the hearing shall 
be arranged so that the hearing is accessible to the household member 
suspected of intentional Program violation. If the household member or 
its representative cannot be located or fails to appear at a hearing 
initiated by the State agency without good cause, the hearing shall be 
conducted without the household member being represented. Even though 
the household member is not represented, the hearing official is 
required to carefully consider the evidence and determine if intentional 
Program violation was committed based on clear and convincing evidence. 
If the household member is found to have committed an intentional 
Program violation but a hearing official later determines that the 
household member

[[Page 671]]

or representative had good cause for not appearing, the previous 
decision shall no longer remain valid and the State agency shall conduct 
a new hearing. The hearing official who originally ruled on the case may 
conduct the new hearing. In instances where good cause for failure to 
appear is based upon a showing of nonreceipt of the hearing notice as 
specified in paragraph (e)(3)(ii) of this section, the household member 
has 30 days after the date of the written notice of the hearing decision 
to claim good cause for failure to appear. In all other instances, the 
household member has 10 days from the date of the scheduled hearing to 
present reasons indicating a good cause for failure to appear. A hearing 
official must enter the good cause decision into the record.
    (5) Participation while awaiting a hearing. A pending 
disqualification hearing shall not affect the individual's or the 
household's right to be certified and participate in the Program. Since 
the State agency cannot disqualify a household member for intentional 
Program violation until the hearing official finds that the individual 
has committed intentional Program violation, the State agency shall 
determine the eligibility and benefit level of the household in the same 
manner it would be determined for any other household. For example, if 
the misstatement or action for which the household member is suspected 
of intentional Program violation does not affect the household's current 
circumstances, the household would continue to receive its allotment 
based on the latest certification action or be recertified based on a 
new application and its current circumstances. However, the household's 
benefits shall be terminated if the certification period has expired and 
the household, after receiving its notice of expiration, fails to 
reapply. The State agency shall also reduce or terminate the household's 
benefits if the State agency has documentation which substantiates that 
the household is ineligible or eligible for fewer benefits (even if 
these facts led to the suspicion of intentional Program violation and 
the resulting disqualification hearing) and the household fails to 
request a fair hearing and continuation of benefits pending the hearing. 
For example, the State agency may have facts which substantiate that a 
household failed to report a change in its circumstances even though the 
State agency has not yet demonstrated that the failure to report 
involved an intentional act of Program violation.
    (6) Criteria for determining intentional Program violation. The 
hearing authority shall base the determination of intentional Program 
violation on clear and convincing evidence which demonstrates that the 
household member(s) committed, and intended to commit, intentional 
Program violation as defined in paragraph (c) of this section.
    (7) Decision format. The hearing authority's decision shall specify 
the reasons for the decision, identify the supporting evidence, identify 
the pertinent FCS regulation, and respond to reasoned arguments made by 
the household member or representative.
    (8) Imposition of disqualification penalties. (i) If the hearing 
authority rules that the household member has committed intentional 
Program violation, the household member shall be disqualified in 
accordance with the disqualification periods specified in paragraph (b) 
on this section beginning with the first month which follows the date 
the household member receives written notification of the hearing 
decision. However, if the act of intentional Program violation which led 
to the disqualification occurred prior to notification of the 
disqualification periods specified in paragraph (b) of this section, the 
household member shall be disqualified in accordance with the 
disqualification periods in effect at the time of the offense. The same 
act of intentional Program violation repeated over a period of time 
shall not be separated so that separate penalties can be imposed.
    (ii) No further administrative appeal procedure exists after an 
adverse State level hearing. The determinaton of intentional Program 
violation made by a disqualification hearing official cannot be reversed 
by a subsequent fair hearing decision. The household member, however, is 
entitled to seek relief in a court having appropriate jurisdiction. The 
period of disqualification may be

[[Page 672]]

subject to stay by a court of appropriate jurisdiction or other 
injunctive remedy.
    (iii) If the individual is not certified to participate in the 
Program at the time the disqualification period is to begin, the period 
shall take effect immediately after the individual applies for and is 
determined eligible for benefits.
    (iv) Once a disqualification penalty has been imposed against a 
currently participating household member, the period of disqualification 
shall continue uninterrupted until completed regardless of the 
eligibility of the disqualifed member's household. However, the 
disqualified member's household shall continue to be responsible for 
repayment of the overissuance which resulted from the disqualified 
member's intentional Program violation regardless of its eligibility for 
Program benefits.
    (9) Notification of hearing decision. (i) If the hearing official 
finds that the household member did not commit intentional Program 
violation, the State agency shall provide a written notice which informs 
the household member of the decision.
    (ii) If the hearing official finds that the household member 
committed intentional Program violation, the State agency shall provide 
written notice to the household member prior to disqualification. The 
notice shall inform the household member of the decision and the reason 
for the decision. In addition, the notice shall inform the household 
member of the date the disqualification will take effect. If the 
individual is no longer participating, the notice shall inform the 
individual that the period of disqualification will be deferred until 
such time as the individual again applies for and is determined eligible 
for Program benefits. The State agency shall also provide written notice 
to the remaining household members, if any, of either the allotment they 
will receive during the period of disqualification or that they must 
reapply because the certification period has expired. The procedures for 
handling the income and resources of the disqualified member are 
described in Sec. 273.11(c). A written demand letter for restitution, as 
described in Sec. 273.18(d)(3), shall also be provided.
    (iii) Each State agency shall develop a form for notifying 
individuals that they have been found by an administrative 
disqualification hearing to have committed intentional Program 
violation. The form shall contain the information required by this 
section.
    (10) Local level hearings. (i) The State agency may choose to 
provide administrative disqualification hearings at the local level in 
some or all of its project areas with a right to appeal to a State level 
hearing. If a local level disqualification hearing determines that a 
household member committed intentional Program violation, the 
notification of hearing decision described in paragraph (e)(9) of this 
section shall also inform the household member of the right to appeal 
the decision within 15 days after the receipt of the notice, the date 
the disqualification will take effect unless a State level hearing is 
requested, and that benefits will be continued pending a State level 
hearing if the household is otherwise eligible. If the household member 
appeals the local level decision, the advance notice of hearing, as 
described in paragraph (e)(3) of this section, shall be provided at 
least 10 days in advance of the scheduled State level hearing and shall 
also inform the household member that the local hearing decision will be 
upheld if the household or its representative fails to appear for the 
hearing without good cause. When a local level decision is appealed, the 
State agency shall conduct the State level hearing, arrive at a 
decision, and notify the household member and local agency of the 
decision within 60 days of the date the household member appealed its 
case. The prior decision shall not be taken into consideration by the 
State hearing officer in making the final determination. In all other 
respects, local level disqualification hearings shall be handled in 
accordance with the procedures specified in this section for State level 
hearings.
    (ii) The State agency shall develop appropriate forms which contain 
the information required by this section for notification of a local 
level hearing

[[Page 673]]

decision and advance notice of a scheduled State level hearing for 
appeal of a local level decision.
    (f) Waived hearings. Each State agency shall have the option of 
establishing procedures to allow accused individuals to waive their 
rights to an administrative disqualification hearing. For State agencies 
which choose the option of allowing individuals to waive their rights to 
an administrative disqualification hearing, the procedures shall conform 
with the requirements outlined in this section.
    (1) Advance notification. (i) The State agency shall provide written 
notification to the household member suspected of intentional Program 
violation that the member can waive his/her right to an administrative 
disqualification hearing. Prior to providing this written notification 
to the household member, the State agency shall ensure that the evidence 
against the household member is reviewed by someone other than the 
eligibility worker assigned to the accused individual's household and a 
decision is obtained that such evidence warrants scheduling a 
disqualification hearing.
    (ii) The written notification provided to the household member which 
informs him/her of the possibility of waiving the administrative 
disqualification hearing shall include, at a minimum:
    (A) The date that the signed waiver must be received by the State 
agency to avoid the holding of a hearing and a signature block for the 
accused individual, along with a statement that the head of household 
must also sign the waiver if the accused individual is not the head of 
household, with an appropriately designated signature block;
    (B) A statement of the accused individual's right to remain silent 
concerning the charge(s), and that anything said or signed by the 
individual concerning the charge(s) can be used against him/her in a 
court of law;
    (C) The fact that a waiver of the disqualification hearing will 
result in disqualification and a reduction in benefits for the period of 
disqualification, even if the accused individual does not admit to the 
facts as presented by the State agency;
    (D) An opportunity for the accused individual to specify whether or 
not he/she admits to the facts as presented by the State agency. This 
opportunity shall consist of the following statements, or statements 
developed by the State agency which have the same effect, and a method 
for the individual to designate his/her choice:
    (1) I admit to the facts as presented, and understand that a 
disqualification penalty will be imposed if I sign this waiver; and
    (2) I do not admit that the facts as presented are correct. However, 
I have chosen to sign this waiver and understand that a disqualification 
penalty will result;
    (E) The telephone number and, if possible, the name of the person to 
contact for additional information; and
    (F) The fact that the remaining household members, if any, will be 
held responsible for repayment of the resulting claim.
    (iii) The State agency shall develop a waiver of right to an 
administrative disqualification hearing form which contains the 
information required by this section as well as the information 
described in paragraph (e)(3) of this section for advance notice of a 
hearing. However, if the household member is notified of the possibility 
of waiving his/her right to an administrative disqualification hearing 
before the State agency has scheduled a hearing, the State agency is not 
required to notify the household member of the date, time and place of 
the hearing at that point as required by paragraph (e)(3)(i)(A) of this 
section.
    (2) Imposition of disqualification penalties. (i) If the household 
member suspected of intentional Program violation signs the waiver of 
right to an administrative disqualification hearing and the signed 
waiver is received within the timeframes specified by the State agency, 
the household member shall be disqualified in accordance with the 
disqualification periods specified in paragraph (b) of this section. The 
period of disqualification shall begin with the first month which 
follows the date the household member receives written notification of 
the disqualification.

[[Page 674]]

However, if the act of intentional Program violation which led to the 
disqualification occurred prior to the written notification of the 
disqualification periods specified in paragraph (b) of this section, the 
household member shall be disqualified in accordance with the 
disqualification periods in effect at the time of the offense. The same 
act of intentional Program violation repeated over a period of time 
shall not be separated so that separate penalties can be imposed.
    (ii) No further administrative appeal procedure exists after an 
individual waives his/her right to an administrative disqualification 
hearing and a disqualification penalty has been imposed. The 
disqualification penalty cannot be changed by a subsequent fair hearing 
decision. The household member, however is entitled to seek relief in a 
court having appropriate jurisdiction. The period of disqualification 
may be subject to stay by a court of appropriate jurisdiction or other 
injunctive remedy.
    (iii) If the individual is not certified to participate in the 
Program at the time the disqualification period is to begin, the period 
shall take effect immediately after the individual applies for and is 
determined eligible for benefits.
    (iv) Once a disqualification penalty has been imposed against a 
currently participating household member, the period of disqualification 
shall continue uninterrupted until completed regardless of the 
eligibility of the disqualified member's household. However, the 
disqualified member's household shall continue to be responsible for 
repayment of the overissuance which resulted from the disqualified 
member's intentional Program violation regardless of its eligibility for 
Program benefits.
    (3) Notification of disqualification. The State agency shall provide 
written notice to the household member prior to disqualification. The 
State agency shall also provide written notice to any remaining 
household members of the allotment they will receive during the period 
of disqualification or that they must reapply because the certification 
period has expired. The notice(s) shall conform to the requirements for 
notification of a hearing decision specified in paragraph (e)(9) of this 
section. A written demand letter for restitution, as described in 
Sec. 273.18(d)(3), shall also be provided.
    (4) Waiver of hearing at local level. Any State agency which has 
adopted the two-tiered approach for administrative disqualification 
hearings may also provide for waiver of the right to disqualification 
hearing procedures outlined in this section.
    (g) Court referrals. Any State agency exempted from the requirement 
to establish an administrative disqualification system in accordance 
with paragraph (a) of this section shall refer appropriate cases for 
prosecution by a court of appropriate jurisdiction in accordance with 
the requirements outlined in this section.
    (1) Appropriate cases. (i) The State agency shall refer cases of 
alleged intentional Program violation for prosecution in accordance with 
an agreement with prosecutors or State law. The agreement shall provide 
for prosecution of intentional Program violation cases and include the 
understanding that prosection will be pursued in cases where 
appropriate. This agreement shall also include information on how, and 
under what circumstances, cases will be accepted for possible 
prosecution and any other criteria set by the prosecutor for accepting 
cases for prosecution, such as a minimum amount of overissuance which 
resulted from intentional Program violation.
    (ii) State agencies are encouraged to refer for prosecution under 
State or local statutes those individuals suspected of committing 
intentional Program violation, particularly if large amounts of food 
stamps are suspected of having been obtained by intentional Program 
violation, or the individual is suspected of committing more than one 
act of intentional Program violation. The State agency shall confer with 
its legal representative to determine the types of cases which will be 
accepted for possible prosecution. State agencies shall also encourage 
State and local prosecutors to recommend to the courts that a 
disqualification penalty as provided in section 6(b) of the Food Stamp 
Act be imposed in addition to

[[Page 675]]

any other civil or criminal penalties for such violations.
    (2) Imposition of disqualification penalties. (i) State agencies 
shall disqualify an individual found guilty of intentional Program 
violation for the length of time specified by the court. If the court 
fails to impose a disqualification period, the State agency shall impose 
a disqualification period in accordance with the provisions in paragraph 
(b) of this section, unless contrary to the court order. If 
disqualification is ordered but a date for initiating the 
disqualification period is not specified, the State agency shall 
initiate the disqualification period for currently eligible individuals 
within 45 days of the date the disqualification was ordered. Any other 
court-imposed disqualification shall begin within 45 days of the date 
the court found a currently eligible individual guilty of civil or 
criminal misrepresentation or fraud.
    (ii) If the individual is not certified to participate in the 
Program at the time the disqualification period is to begin, the period 
shall take effect immediately after the individual applies for and is 
determined eligible for benefits.
    (iii) Once a disqualification penalty has been imposed against a 
currently participating household member, the period of disqualification 
shall continue uninterrupted until completed regardless of the 
eligibility of the disqualified member's household. However, the 
disqualified member's household shall continue to be responsible for 
repayment of the overissuance which resulted from the disqualified 
member's intentional Program violation regardless of its eligibility for 
Program benefits.
    (3) Notification of disqualification. If the court finds that the 
household member committed intentional Program violation, the State 
agency shall provide written notice to the household member. The notice 
shall be provided prior to disqualification, whenever possible. The 
notice shall inform the household member of the disqualification and the 
date the disqualification will take effect. The State agency shall also 
provide written notice to the remaining household members, if any, of 
the allotment they will receive during the period of disqualification or 
that they must reapply because the certification period has expired. The 
procedures for handling the income and resources of the disqualified 
member are described in Sec. 273.11(c). In addition, the State agency 
shall provide the written demand letter for restitution described in 
Sec. 273.18(d)(3).
    (h) Deferred adjudication. Each State agency shall have the option 
of establishing procedures to allow accused individuals to sign 
disqualification consent agreements for cases of deferred adjudication. 
State agencies are encouraged to use this option for those cases in 
which a determination of guilt is not obtained from a court due to the 
accused individual having met the terms of a court order or which are 
not prosecuted due to the accused individual having met the terms of an 
agreement with the prosecutor. For State agencies which choose the 
option of allowing individuals to sign disqualification consent 
agreements in cases referred for prosecution, the procedures shall 
conform with the requirements outlined in this section.
    (1) Advance notification. (i) The State agency shall enter into an 
agreement with the State's Attorney General's Office or, where 
necessary, with county prosecutors which provides for advance written 
notification to the household member of the consequences of consenting 
to disqualification in cases of deferred adjudication.
    (ii) The written notification provided to the household member which 
informs him/her of the consequences of consenting to disqualification as 
a part of deferred adjudication shall include, at a minimum:
    (A) A statement for the accused individual to sign that the accused 
individual understands the consequences of consenting to 
disqualification, along with a statement that the head of household must 
also sign the consent agreement if the accused individual is not the 
head of household, with an appropriately designated signature block.
    (B) A statement that consenting to disqualification will result in 
disqualification and a reduction in benefits for the period of 
disqualification, even though the accused individual was not

[[Page 676]]

found guilty of civil of criminal misrepresentation or fraud.
    (C) A warning that the disqualification periods for intentional 
Program violations under the Food Stamp Program are as specified in 
paragraph (b) of this section, and a statement of which penalty will be 
imposed as a result of the accused individual having consented to 
disqualification.
    (D) A statement of the fact that the remaining household members, if 
any, will be held responsible for repayment of the resulting claim, 
unless the accused individual has already repaid the claim as a result 
of meeting the terms of the agreement with the prosecutor or the court 
order.
    (iii) The State agency shall develop a disqualification consent 
agreement, or language to be included in the agreements reached between 
the prosecutors and accused individuals or in the court orders, which 
contains the information required by this section for notifying a 
household member suspected of intentional Program violation of the 
consequences of signing a disqualification consent agreement.
    (2) Imposition of disqualification penalties. (i) If the household 
member suspected of intentional Program violation signs the 
disqualification consent agreement, the household member shall be 
disqualified in accordance with the disqualification periods specified 
in paragraph (b) of this section, unless contrary to the court order. 
The period of disqualification shall begin within 45 days of the date 
the household member signed the disqualification consent agreement. 
However, if the court imposes a disqualification period or specifies the 
date for initiating the disqualification period, the State agency shall 
disqualify the household member in accordance with the court order.
    (ii) If the individual is not certified to participate in the 
Program at the time the disqualification period is to begin, the period 
shall take effect immediately after the individual applies for and is 
determined eligible for benefits.
    (iii) Once a disqualification penalty has been imposed against a 
currently participating household member, the period of disqualification 
shall continue uninterrupted until completed regardless of the 
eligibility of the disqualified member's household. However, the 
disqualified member's household shall continue to be responsible for 
repayment of the overissuance which resulted from the disqualified 
member's intentional Program violation regardless of its eligibility for 
Program benefits.
    (3) Notification of disqualification. If the household member 
suspected of intentional Program violation signs the disqualification 
consent agreement, the State agency shall provide written notice to the 
household member. The notice shall be provided prior to 
disqualification, whenever possible. The notice shall inform the 
household member of the disqualification and the date the 
disqualification will take effect. The State agency shall also provide 
written notice to the remaining household members, if any, of the 
allotment they will receive during the period of disqualification or 
that they must reapply because the certification period has expired. The 
procedures for handling the income and resources of the disqualified 
member are described in Sec. 273.11(c). In addition, the State agency 
shall provide the written demand letter for restitution described in 
Sec. 273.18(d)(3).
    (i) Reporting requirements. (1) Each State agency shall report to 
FCS information concerning individuals disqualified for intentional 
Program violation, including those individuals disqualified based on the 
determination of an administrative disqualification hearing official or 
a court of appropriate jurisdiction and those individuals disqualified 
as a result of signing either a waiver of right to a disqualification 
hearing or a disqualification consent agreement in cases referred for 
prosecution. This information shall be submitted to FCS so that it is 
received no later than 30 days after the date the disqualification took 
effect, or would have taken effect for a currently ineligible individual 
whose disqualification is pending future eligibility.
    (2) Each State agency shall report information concerning each 
individual disqualified for intentional Program violation in a format 
designed by FCS. This format shall include the individual's social 
security number, date of

[[Page 677]]

birth, and full name, the number of the disqualification (1<SUP>st, 
2<SUP>nd, or 3<SUP>rd), the State and county in which the 
disqualification took place, the date on which the disqualification took 
effect, and the length of the disqualification period imposed.
    (3) Each State agency shall submit the required information on each 
individual disqualified for intentional Program violation through a 
reporting system in accordance with procedures specified by FCS.
    (4) All the data submitted by State agencies will be available for 
use by any State Welfare Agency.
    (i) State agencies shall, at a minimum, use the data for the 
following:
    (A) To determine the eligibility of individual Program applicants 
prior to certification in cases where the State agency has reason to 
believe a household member is subject to disqualification in another 
political jurisdiction, and
    (B) To ascertain the appropriate penalty to impose, based on past 
disqualifications, in a case under consideration.
    (ii) State agencies may also use the data in other ways, such as the 
following:
    (A) To screen all program applicants prior to certification, and
    (B) To periodically match the entire list of disqualified 
individuals against their current caseloads.
    (5) The disqualification of an individual for intentional Program 
violation in one political jurisdiction shall be valid in another. 
However, one or more intentional Program violations which occurred prior 
to April 1, 1983 shall be considered as only one previous 
disqualification when determining the appropriate penalty to impose in a 
case under consideration, regardless of where  the  disqualification(s)  
took place. State agencies are required to identify any individuals 
disqualified for fraud prior to implementation of this rule and to 
submit the information required by this section on such individuals.
    (6) In cases where the imposition of a disqualification penalty is 
being held pending the future eligibility of a household member found to 
have committed intentional Program violation, the State agency shall 
submit a report revising the original disqualification report once the 
individual begins the period of disqualification in accordance with 
instructions provided by FCS.
    (7) In cases where the disqualification for intentional Program 
violation is reversed by a court of appropriate jurisdiction, the State 
agency shall submit a report to purge the file of the information 
relating to the disqualification which was reversed in accordance with 
instructions provided by FCS.
    (j) Reversed disqualifications. In cases where the determination of 
intentional program violation is reversed by a court of appropriate 
jurisdiction, the State agency shall reinstate the individual in the 
program if the household is eligible. The State agency shall restore 
benefits that were lost as a result of the disqualification in 
accordance with the procedures specified in Sec. 273.17(e).

[Amdt. 242, 48 FR 6855, Feb. 15, 1983, as amended by Amdt. 269, 51 FR 
10793, Mar. 28, 1986; Amdt. 357, 60 FR 43515, Aug. 22, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 273.17  Restoration of lost benefits.

    (a) Entitlement. (1) The State agency shall restore to households 
benefits which were lost whenever the loss was caused by an error by the 
State agency or by an administrative disqualification for intentional 
Program violation which was subsequently reversed as specified in 
paragraph (e) of this section, or if there is a statement elsewhere in 
the regulations specifically stating that the household is entitled to 
restoration of lost benefits. Furthermore, unless there is a statement 
elsewhere in the regulations that a household is entitled to lost 
benefits for a longer period, benefits shall be restored for not more 
than twelve months prior to whichever of the following occurred first:
    (i) The date the State agency receives a request for restoration 
from a household; or
    (ii) The date the State agency is notified or otherwise discovers 
that a loss to a household has occurred.
    (2) The State agency shall restore to households benefits which were 
found by any judicial action to have been wrongfully withheld. If the 
judicial action is the first action the recipient

[[Page 678]]

has taken to obtain restoration of lost benefits, then benefits shall be 
restored for a period of not more than twelve months from the date the 
court action was initiated. When the judicial action is a review of a 
State agency action, the benefits shall be restored for a period of not 
more than twelve months from the first of the following dates:
    (i) The date the State agency receives a request for restoration:
    (ii) If no request for restoration is received, the date the fair 
hearing action was initiated; but
    (iii) Never more than one year from when the State agency is 
notified of, or discovers, the loss.
    (3) Benefits shall be restored even if the household is currently 
ineligible.
    (b) Errors discovered by the State agency. If the State agency 
determines that a loss of benefits has occurred, and the household is 
entitled to restoration of those benefits, the State agency shall 
automatically take action to restore any benefits that were lost. No 
action by the household is necessary. However, benefits shall not be 
restored if the benefits were lost more than 12 months prior to the 
month the loss was discovered by the State agency in the normal course 
of business, or were lost more than 12 months prior to the month the 
State agency was notified in writing or orally of a possible loss to a 
specific household. The State agency shall notify the household of its 
entitlement, the amount of benefits to be restored, any offsetting that 
was done, the method of restoration, and the right to appeal through the 
fair hearing process if the household disagrees with any aspect of the 
proposed lost benefit restoration.
    (c) Disputed benefits. (1) If the State agency determines that a 
household is entitled to restoration of lost benefits, but the household 
does not agree with the amount to be restored as calculated by the State 
agency or any other action taken by the State agency to restore lost 
benefits, the household may request a fair hearing within 90 days of the 
date the household is notified of its entitlement to restoration of lost 
benefits. If a fair hearing is requested prior to or during the time 
lost benefits are being restored, the household shall receive the lost 
benefits as determined by the State agency pending the results of the 
fair hearing. If the fair hearing decision is favorable to the 
household, the State agency shall restore the lost benefits in 
accordance with that decision.
    (2) If a household believes it is entitled to restoration of lost 
benefits but the State agency, after reviewing the case file, does not 
agree, the household has 90 days from the date of the State agency 
determination to request a fair hearing. The State agency shall restore 
lost benefits to the household only if the fair hearing decision is 
favorable to the household. Benefits lost more than 12 months prior to 
the date the State agency was initially informed of the household's 
possible entitlement to lost benefits shall not be restored.
    (d) Computing the amount to be restored. After correcting the loss 
for future months and excluding those months for which benefits may have 
been lost prior to the 12-month time limits described in paragraphs (b) 
and (c) of this section, the State agency shall calculate the amount to 
be restored as follows:
    (1) If the household was eligible but received an incorrect 
allotment, the loss of benefits shall be calculated only for those 
months the household participated. If the loss was caused by an 
incorrect delay, denial, or termination of benefits, the months affected 
by the loss shall be calculated as follows:
    (i) If an eligible household's application was erroneously denied, 
the month the loss initially occurred shall be the month of application, 
or for an eligible household filing a timely reapplication, the month 
following the expiration of its certification period.
    (ii) If an eligible household's application was delayed, the months 
for which benefits may be lost shall be calculated in accordance with 
procedures in Sec. 273.2(h).
    (iii) If a household's benefits were erroneously terminated, the 
month the loss initially occurred shall be the first month benefits were 
not received as a result of the erroneous action.
    (iv) After computing the date the loss initially occurred, the loss 
shall be calculated for each month subsequent to that date until either 
the first month the error is corrected or the first

[[Page 679]]

month the household is found ineligible.
    (2) For each month affected by the loss, the State agency shall 
determine if the household was actually eligible. In cases where there 
is no information in the household's case file to document that the 
household was actually eligible, the State agency shall advise the 
household of what information must be provided to determine eligibility 
for these months. For each month the household cannot provide the 
necessary information to demonstrate its eligibility, the household 
shall be considered ineligible.
    (3) For the months the household was eligible, the State agency 
shall calculate the allotment the household should have received. If the 
household received a smaller allotment than it was eligible to receive, 
the difference between the actual and correct allotments equals the 
amount to be restored.
    (4) If a claim against a household is unpaid or held in suspense as 
provided in Sec. 273.18, the amount to be restored shall be offset 
against the amount due on the claim before the balance, if any, is 
restored to the household. At the point in time when the household is 
certified and receives an initial allotment, the initial allotment shall 
not be reduced to offset claims, even if the initial allotment is paid 
retroactively.
    (e) Lost benefits to individuals disqualified for intentional 
Program violation. Individuals disqualified for intentional Program 
violation are entitled to restoration of any benefits lost during the 
months that they were disqualified, not to exceed twelve months prior to 
the date of State agency notification, only if the decision which 
resulted in disqualification is subsequently reversed. For example, an 
individual would not be entitled to restoration of lost benefits for the 
period of disqualification based solely on the fact that a criminal 
conviction could not be obtained, unless the individual successfully 
challenged the disqualification period imposed by an administrative 
disqualification in a separate court action. For each month the 
individual was disqualified, not to exceed twelve months prior to State 
agency notification, the amount to be restored, if any, shall be 
determined by comparing the allotment the household received with the 
allotment the household would have received had the disqualified member 
been allowed to participate. If the household received a smaller 
allotment than it should have received, the difference equals the amount 
to be restored. Participation in an administrative disqualification 
hearing in which the household contests the State agency assertion of 
intentional Program violation shall be considered notification that the 
household is requesting restored benefits.
    (f) Method of restoration. Regardless of whether a household is 
currently eligible or ineligible, the State agency shall restore lost 
benefits to a household by issuing an allotment equal to the amount of 
benefits that were lost. The amount restored shall be issued in addition 
to the allotment currently eligible households are entitled to receive. 
The State agency shall honor reasonable requests by households to 
restore lost benefits in monthly installments if, for example, the 
household fears the excess coupons may be stolen, or that the amount to 
be restored is more than it can use in a reasonable period of time.
    (g) Changes in household composition. Whenever lost benefits are due 
a household and the household's membership has changed, the State agency 
shall restore the lost benefits to the household containing a majority 
of the individuals who were household members at the time the loss 
occurred. If the State agency cannot locate or determine the household 
which contains a majority of household members the State agency shall 
restore the lost benefits to the household containing the head of the 
household at the time the loss occurred.
    (h) Accounting procedures. Each State agency shall be responsible 
for maintaining an accounting system for documenting a household's 
entitlement to restoration of lost benefits and for recording the 
balance of lost benefits that must be restored to the household. Each 
State agency shall at a minimum, document how the amount to be restored 
was calculated and the reason lost benefits must be restored. The 
accounting system shall be designed to

[[Page 680]]

readily identify those situations where a claim against a household can 
be used to offset the amount to be restored.

[Amdt. 132, 43 FR 47889, Oct. 17, 1978, as amended by Amdt. 225, 48 FR 
16831, Apr. 19, 1983; Amdt. 314, 54 FR 24518, June 7, 1989; Amdt. 356, 
59 FR 29713, June 9, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 273.18  Claims against households.

    (a) Establishing claims against households. All adult household 
members shall be jointly and severally liable for the value of any 
overissuance of benefits to the household. The State agency shall 
establish a claim against any household that has received more food 
stamp benefits than it is entitled to receive or any household which 
contains an adult member who was an adult member of another household 
that received more food stamp benefits than it was entitled to receive.
    (1) Inadvertent household error claims. A claim shall be handled as 
an inadvertent household error claim if the overissuance was caused by:
    (i) A misunderstanding or unintended error on the part of the 
household;
    (ii) A misunderstanding or unintended error on the part of a 
categorically eligible household provided a claim can be calculated 
based on a change in net income and/or household size amount;
    (iii) SSA action of failure to take action which resulted in the 
household's categorical eligibility provided a claim can be calculated 
based on a change in net income and/or household size.
    (2) Administrative error claims. A claim shall be handled as an 
administrative error claim if the overissuance was caused by State 
agency action or failure to take action or, in the case of categorical 
eligibility, an action by an agency of the State or local government 
which resulted in the household's improper eligibility for public 
assistance or general assistance provided a claim can be calculated 
based on a change in net income and/or household size.
    (3) Intentional Program violation claims. A claim shall be handled 
as an intentional Program violation claim only if an administrative 
disqualification hearing official or a court of appropriate jurisdiction 
has determined that a household member committed intentional Program 
violation as defined in Sec. 273.16(c), or an individual is disqualified 
as a result of signing either a waiver of his/her disqualification 
hearing as discussed in Sec. 273.16(f) or a disqualification consent 
agreement in cases referred for prosecution as discussed in 
Sec. 273.16(h). Prior to the determination of intentional Program 
violation or the signing of either a waiver of right to a 
disqualification hearing or a disqualification consent agreement in 
cases of deferred adjudication, the claim against the household shall be 
handled as an inadvertent household error claim.
    (b) Criteria for establishing inadvertent household and 
administrative error claims. The State agency shall take action to 
establish a claim against any household that received an overissuance 
due to an inadvertent household or administrative error if the criteria 
specified in this paragraph have been met. At a minimum, the State 
agency shall take action on those claims for which 12 months or less 
have elasped between the month an overissuence occurred and the month 
the State agency discovered a specific case involving an overissuance. 
The State agency may choose to take action on those claims for which 
more than 12 months have elasped. However, the State agency shall not 
take action on claims for which more than six years have elasped between 
the month an overissuance occurred and the month the State agency 
discovered a specific case involving an overissuance.
    (1) Instances of inadvertent household error which may result in a 
claim include, but are not limited to, the following:
    (i) The household unintentionally failed to provide the State agency 
with correct or complete information;
    (ii) The household unintentionally failed to report to the State 
agency changes in its household circumstances; or
    (iii) The household unintentionally received benefits or more 
benefits than it was entitled to receive pending a fair hearing decision 
because the household requested a continuation of benefits based on the 
mistaken belief that it was entitled to such benefits.

[[Page 681]]

    (iv) The household was receiving food stamps solely because of 
categorical eligibility and the household was subsequently determined 
ineligible for PA, or GA and/or SSI at the time they received it.
    (v) The SSA took an action or failed to take the appropriate action, 
which resulted in the household improperly receiving SSI.
    (2) Instances of administrative error which may result in a claim 
include, but are not limited to, the following:
    (i) A State agency failed to take prompt action on a change reported 
by the household;
    (ii) A State agency incorrectly computed the household's income or 
deductions, or otherwise assigned an incorrect allotment;
    (iii) A State agency incorrectly issued duplicate ATP's to a 
household which were subsequently transacted;
    (iv) The State agency continued to provide household food stamp 
allotments after its certification period had expired without benefit of 
a reapplication determination; or
    (v) The State agency failed to provide a household a reduced level 
of food stamp benefits because its public assistance grant changed.
    (vi) An agency of the State or local government took an action or 
failed to take an appropriate action, which resulted in the household 
improperly receiving PA or GA.
    (3) Neither an administrative error claim nor an inadvertent 
household error claim shall be established if an overissuance occurred 
as a result of the following:
    (i) A State agency failed to insure that a household fulfilled the 
following procedural requirements:
    (A) Signed the application form,
    (B) Completed a current work registration form, or
    (C) Was certified in the correct project area;
    (ii) The household transacted an expired ATP, unless the household 
altered its ATP.
    (c) Calculating the amount of claims--(1) Inadvertent household and 
administrative error claims. (i) For each month that a household 
received an overissuance due to an inadvertent household or 
administrative error, the State agency shall determine the correct 
amount of food stamp benefits the household was entitled to receive. The 
amount of the inadvertent household or administrative error claim shall 
be calculated based, at a minimum, on the amount of overissuance which 
occurred during the 12 months preceding the date the overissuance was 
discovered. The State agency may choose to calculate the amount of the 
claim back to the month the inadvertent household or administrative 
error occurred, regardless of the length of time that elapsed until the 
inadvertent household or administrative error was discovered. However, 
the State agency shall not include in its calculation any amount of the 
overissuance which occurred in a month more than six years from the date 
the overissuance was discovered. In cases involving reported changes, 
the State agency shall determine the month the overissuance initially 
occurred as follows:
    (A) If, due to an inadvertent error on the part of the household, 
the household failed to report a change in its circumstances within the 
required timeframes, the first month affected by the household's failure 
to report shall be the first month in which the change would have been 
effective had it been timely reported. However, in no event shall the 
State agency determine as the first month in which the change would have 
been effective any month later than two months from the month in which 
the change in household circumstances occurred.
    (B) If the household timely reported a change, but the State agency 
did not act on the change within the required timeframes, the first 
month affected by the State's failure to act shall be the first month 
the State agency would have made the change effective had it timely 
acted. However, in no event shall the State agency determine as the 
first month in which the change would have been effective any month 
later than two months from the month in which the change in household 
circumstances occurred. If a notice of adverse action was required but 
was not provided, the State agency shall assume for the purpose of 
calculating the claim that the maximum advance notice period as provided 
in Sec. 273.13(a)(1)

[[Page 682]]

would have expired without the household requesting a fair hearing.
    (ii) If the household received a larger allotment than it was 
entitled to receive, the State agency shall establish a claim against 
the household equal to the difference between the allotment the 
household received and the allotment the household should have received. 
For categorically eligible households, a claim will only be determined 
when it can be computed on the basis of changed household net income 
and/or household size. A claim shall not be established if there was not 
a change in net income and/or household size.
    (iii) After calculating the amount of the inadvertent household or 
administrative error claim, the State agency shall offset the amount of 
the claim against any amounts which have not yet been restored to the 
household in accordance with Sec. 273.17. The State agency shall then 
initiate collection action for the remaining balance, if any.
    (2) Intentional Program violation claims. (i) For each month that a 
household received an overissuance due to an act of intentional Program 
violation, the State agency shall determine the correct amount of food 
stamp benefits, if any, the household was entitled to receive. The 
amount of the intentional Program violation claim shall be calculated 
back to the month the act of intentional Program violation occurred, 
regardless of the length of time that elapsed until the determination of 
intentional Program violation was made. However, the State agency shall 
not include in its calculation any amount of the overissuance which 
occurred in a month more than six years from the date the overissuance 
was discovered. If the household member is determined to have committed 
intentional Program violation by intentionally failing to report a 
change in its household's circumstances, the first month affected by the 
household's failure to report shall be the first month in which the 
change would have been effective had it been reported. However, in no 
event shall the State agency determine as the first month in which the 
change would have been effective any month later than two months from 
the month in which the change in household circumstances occurred.
    (ii) If the household received a larger allotment than it was 
entitled to receive, the State agency shall establish a claim against 
the household equal to the difference between the allotment the 
household received and the allotment the household should have received. 
In calculating IPV claims involving unreported earned income, the State 
agency shall not apply the earned income deduction specified in 
Sec. 273.9(d)(2) to that part of any earned income which a household 
willfully or fraudulently failed to report in a timely manner as 
determined by one of the disqualification procedures specified in 
Sec. 273.16, which are: an administrative disqualification hearing; a 
waiver to such a hearing; a court order; or a deferred adjudication.
    (iii) Once the amount of the intentional Program violation claim is 
established, the State agency shall offset the claim against any amount 
of lost benefits that have not yet been restored to the household in 
accordance with Sec. 273.17.
    (d) Collecting claims against households--(1) Criteria for 
initiating collection action on inadvertent household and administrative 
error claims.
    (i) State agencies shall initiate collection action against the 
household on all inadvertent household or administrative error claims 
unless the claim is collected through offset or one of the following 
conditions apply:
    (A) The total amount of the claim is less than $35, and the claim 
cannot be recovered by reducing the household's allotment. However, any 
State agency shall have the option to initiate collection action for 
other claims under $35 at such time that multiple overissuances for a 
household total $35 or more. If the State agency chooses this option, 
households shall be informed of this policy.
    (B) The State agency has documentation which shows that the 
household cannot be located.
    (ii) The State agency may postpone collection action on inadvertent 
household error claims in cases where an overissuance is being referred 
for possible prosecution or for administrative

[[Page 683]]

disqualification, and the State agency determines that collection action 
will prejudice the case.
    (2) Criteria for initiating collection action on intentional Program 
violation claims. If a household member is found to have committed 
intentional Program violation (by an administrative disqualification 
hearing official or a court of appropriate jurisdiction) or has signed 
either a waiver as discussed in Sec. 273.16(f) or a consent agreement as 
discussed in Sec. 273.16(h), the State agency shall initiate collection 
action against the individual's household. In addition, a personal 
contact with the household shall be made, if possible. The State agency 
shall initiate such collection unless the household has repaid the 
overissuance already, the State agency has documentation which shows the 
household cannot be located, or the State agency determines that 
collection action will prejudice the case against a household member 
referred for prosecution. The State agency shall initiate collection 
action for an unpaid or partially paid claim even if collection action 
was previously initiated against the household while the claim was being 
handled as an inadvertent household error claim. In cases where a 
household member was found guilty of misrepresentation or fraud by a 
court or signed a disqualification consent agreement in cases referred 
for prosecution, the State agency shall request that the matter of 
restitution be brought before the court or addressed in the agreement 
reached between the prosecutor and accused individual.
    (3) Initiating collection on claims. Each State agency shall develop 
a written demand letter for initiating collection action on claims which 
contains the information required by this paragraph. A model letter is 
available from FCS. If the claim was not established by a fair hearing, 
the State agency shall provide a notice of adverse action as part of or 
along with the demand letter, as specified in Sec. 273.13. The notice of 
adverse action shall be sent on all claims established after March 26, 
1990 and on any preexisting claims if at any time after the effective 
date of these provisions a follow-up demand letter is sent on that 
claim. A one-time adverse action notice accompanying the original demand 
letter, or incorporated into it, which informs recipients they have 90 
days to appeal the claim, satisfies the notice provisions.
    (i) The demand letter shall inform the household of the amount owed, 
the reason for the claim, the period of time the claim covers, any 
offset which reduces the claim and how the household may pay the claim. 
If the amount of the claim was not established at a fair hearing, 
including one consolidated with an administrative disqualification 
hearing, the latter shall notify the household that it may request a 
fair hearing on the amount of the claim.
    (ii) The demand letter shall advise the household of the 
availability of any individual or organization which provides households 
free legal representation.
    (iii) For inadvertent household error claims, the first demand 
letter to a participating household shall inform the household:
    (A) That unless it elects a method of repayment and informs the 
State agency of its election within the time specified in paragraph 
(d)(4)(i) of this section, or timely requests a fair hearing and 
continued benefits, its allotment will be reduced;
    (B) How allotment reduction will affect household benefits, if the 
State agency has not otherwise informed the household about this matter;
    (C) That if the household timely elects allotment reduction, such 
reduction will begin with the first allotment issued after such 
election, as provided in Sec. 273.12(c)(2) of this part; and
    (D) That if the household fails to make a timely election, or to 
timely request a fair hearing and continued benefits, the reduction will 
begin with the first allotment issued after timely notice of such 
election or request is due to the State agency, as provided in 
Sec. 273.12(c)(2) of this part.
    (iv) For inadvertent household error claims, a demand letter 
provided to a participating household subsequent to a fair hearing which 
sustains the claim shall inform the household:
    (A) That unless it elects a method of repayment and informs the 
State agency of its election within the time specified in paragraph 
(d)(4)(i) of this section, its allotment will be reduced;

[[Page 684]]

    (B) How allotment reduction will affect household benefits, if the 
State agency has not otherwise informed the household about this matter;
    (C) That if the household timely elects allotment reduction, such 
reduction will begin with the first allotment issued after such 
election, as provided in Sec. 273.12(c)(2) of this part; and
    (D) That if the household fails to make a timely election, the 
reduction will begin with the first allotment issued after timely notice 
of such election is due to the State agency, as provided in 
Sec. 273.12(c)(2) of this part.
    (v) For intentional Program violation claims, the first demand 
letter provided a participating household following the action which 
establishes the claim, as required in Sec. 237.16 of this part, shall 
inform the household:
    (A) That it must elect a method of repayment and inform the State 
agency of its election within the time specified in paragraph (d)(4)(ii) 
of this section, or its allotment will be reduced;
    (B) How allotment reduction will affect household benefits, if the 
State agency has not otherwise informed the household;
    (C) That if the household timely elects allotment reduction, such 
reduction will begin with the first allotment issued after such 
election, as provided in Sec. 273.12(c)(2) of this part; and
    (D) That if the household fails to make a timely election, the 
reduction will begin with the first allotment issued 10 days after the 
date of the demand letter, as provided in Sec. 273.12(c)(2) of this 
part.
    (vi) If the State agency has implemented the intercept of 
unemployment compensation benefits as provided in paragraph (g)(3) of 
this section, the demand letter shall inform the household of this 
voluntary method of repayment of claims for intentional program 
violations.
    (vii) If the State agency is required to use other means of 
collecting claims for intentional Program violations as specified in 
paragraph (d)(4)(iii) of this section, the letter shall inform the 
household of those other means and the circumstances in which they may 
be used by the State agency.
    (viii) The demand letter shall inform the household of the 
availability of allotment reduction as a voluntary method of repayment 
of administrative error claims.
    (ix) The demand letter shall inform a household against which the 
State agency has initiated collection action of its right to request 
renegotiation of any repayment schedule to which the household has 
agreed in accordance with paragraph (g)(2) of this section in the event 
the household's economic circumstances change.
    (x) The demand letter shall provide space for the household to 
indicate its preferred method of repayment and for the signature of a 
household member.
    (4) Further collection actions. (i) Inadvertent household error 
claims. Participating households which are liable for inadvertent 
household error claims shall be deemed to have elected allotment 
reduction unless they notify the State agency of their choice of 
repayment method within 20 days of the date an initial demand letter, or 
a demand letter for payment following a fair hearing which sustains the 
claim, is mailed or otherwise delivered to them.
    (ii) Intentional Program violation claims. Participating households 
which are liable for intentional Program violation claims shall elect a 
method of repayment on the date of receipt of the demand letter required 
in Sec. 273.16(e)(9) and (g)(3) of this part (or if the date of receipt 
is not a business day, on the next business day) or be deemed to have 
elected allotment reduction. Each State agency shall determine a 
deadline for receipt of such elections for them to be considered timely. 
In no event shall that deadline exceed 10 days from the date the demand 
letter is mailed or otherwise delivered to liable households.
    (iii) If any nonparticipating household or if any currently 
participating household against which collection action has been 
initiated for repayment of an administrative error claim does not 
respond to the first demand letter, additional demand letters shall be 
sent at reasonable intervals, such as 30 days, until the household has 
responded by paying or agreeing to pay the claim, until the criteria for 
suspending collection action specified in paragraph (e) of this section 
have been

[[Page 685]]

met, or until the State agency initiates other collection actions.
    (iv) The State agency shall pursue other means of collection 
actions, as appropriate, to obtain restitution of a claim against any 
household which fails to respond to a written demand letter for 
repayment of any intentional program violation claim unless the State 
agency can determine that such other means are generally not cost 
effective. The State agency may also pursue other collection actions, as 
appropriate, to obtain restitution of a claim against any household 
which fails to respond to a written demand letter for repayment of any 
inadvertent household error or administrative error claim. If the State 
agency chooses to pursue other collection actions and the household pays 
the claim, payments shall be submitted to FCS in accordance with the 
procedures outlined in paragraph (h) of this section and the State 
agency's retention shall be based on the actual amount collected from 
the household through such collection actions.
    (e) Suspending and terminating collection of claims--(1) Suspending 
collection of inadvertent household and administrative error claims. An 
inadvertent household or administrative error claim may be suspended if 
no collection action was initiated because of conditions specified in 
paragraph (d)(1)(i) of this section. If collection action was initiated, 
and at least one demand letter has been sent, further collection action 
of an inadvertent household error claim against a nonparticipating 
household or of any administrative error claim may be suspended when:
    (i) The household cannot be located; or
    (ii) The cost of further collection action is likely to exceed the 
amount that can be recovered.
    (2) Suspending collection of intentional Program violation claims. 
The State agency may suspend collection action on intentional Program 
violation claims at any time if it has documentation that the household 
cannot be located. If the State agency has sent at least one demand 
letter for claims under $100, at least two demand letters for claims 
between $100 and $400, and at least three demand letters for claims of 
more than $400, further collection action of any intentional Program 
violation claim against a nonparticipating household may be suspended 
when the cost of further collection action is likely to exceed the 
amount that can be recovered.
    (3) Terminating collection of claims. A claim may be determined 
uncollectible after it is held in suspense for 3 years. The State agency 
may use a suspended or terminated claim to offset benefits in accordance 
with Sec. 273.17.
    (f) Change in household composition. State agencies shall initiate 
collection action against any or all of the adult members of a household 
at the time an overissuance occurred. Therefore, if a change in 
household composition occurs, State agencies may pursue collection 
action against any household which has a member who was an adult member 
of the household that received the overissuance. The State agency may 
also offset the amount of the claim against restored benefits owed to 
any household which contains a member who was an adult member of the 
original household at the time the overissuance occurred. Under no 
circumstances may a State agency collect more than the amount of the 
claim. In pursuing claims, the State agency may use any of the 
appropriate methods of collecting payments in Sec. 273.18(g).
    (g) Method of collecting payments. As specified in paragraph (d) of 
this section, State agencies shall collect payments for claims against 
households as follows:
    (1) Lump sum. (i) If the household is financially able to pay the 
claim at one time, the State agency shall collect a lump sum cash 
payment. However, the household shall not be required to liquidate all 
of its resources to make this one lump sum payment.
    (ii) If the household is financially unable to pay the entire amount 
of the claim at one time and prefers to make a lump sum cash payment as 
partial payment of the claim, the State agency shall accept this method 
of payment.
    (iii) If the household chooses to make a lump sum payment of food 
stamp coupons as full or partial payment of the claim, the State agency 
shall accept this method of repayment.

[[Page 686]]

    (2) Installments. (i) The State agency shall negotiate a payment 
schedule with the household for repayment of any amounts of the claim 
not repaid through a lump sum payment. Payments shall be accepted by the 
State agency in regular installments. The household may use food stamp 
coupons as full or partial payment of any installment. If the full claim 
or remaining amount of the claim cannot be liquidated in 3 years, the 
State agency may compromise the claim by reducing it to an amount that 
will allow the household to pay the claim in 3 years. A State agency may 
use the full amount of the claim (including any amount compromised) to 
offset benefits in accordance with Sec. 273.17.
    (ii) If the household fails to make a payment in accordance with the 
established repayment schedule (either a lesser amount or no payment), 
the State agency shall send the household a notice explaining that no 
payment or an insufficient payment was received. The notice shall inform 
the household that it may contact the State agency to discuss 
renegotiation of the payment schedule. The notice shall also inform the 
household that unless the overdue payments are made or the State agency 
is contacted to discuss renegotiation of the payment schedule, the 
allotment of a currently participating household against which an 
inadvertent household error or intentional Program violation claim has 
been established may be reduced without a notice of adverse action.
    (iii) If the household responds to the notice, the State agency 
shall take one of the following actions as appropriate:
    (A) If the household makes the overdue payments and wishes to 
continue payments based on the previous schedule, permit the household 
to do so;
    (B) If the household requests renegotiation, and if the State agency 
concurs with the request, negotiate a new payment schedule;
    (C) If the household requests renegotiation of the amount of its 
repayment schedule but the State agency believes that the household's 
economic circumstances have not changed enough to warrant the requested 
settlement, the State agency may continue renegotiation until a 
settlement can be reached. The State agency shall have the option to 
invoke allotment reduction against a currently participating household 
for repayment of an inadvertent household error or intentional Program 
violation claim if a settlement cannot be reached.
    (iv) If a currently participating household against which an 
inadvertent household error or intentional Program violation claims has 
been established fails to respond to the notice, the State agency shall 
invoke allotment reduction. The State agency may also invoke allotment 
reduction if such a household responds by requesting renegotiation of 
the amount of its repayment schedule but the State agency believes that 
the household's economic circumstances have not changed enough to 
warrant the requested settlement. If allotment reduction is invoked, no 
notice of adverse action is required.
    (v) In cases where the household is currently participating in the 
program and a payment schedule is negotiated for repayment of an 
inadvertent household error or intentional Program violation claim, the 
State agency shall ensure that the negotiated amount to be repaid each 
month through installment payments is not less than the amount which 
could be recovered through allotment reduction. Once negotiated, the 
amount to be repaid each month through installment payments shall remain 
unchanged regardless of subsequent changes in the household's monthly 
allotment. However, both the State agency and the household shall have 
the option to initiate renegotiation of the payment schedule if they 
believe that the household's economic circumstances have changed enough 
to warrant such action.
    (3) Intercept of unemployment compensation benefits. State agencies 
which have an approved attachment to their Plan of Operation permitting 
the intercept of unemployment compensation benefits for the collection 
of claims for intentional program violations may arrange for such 
intercept as provided in Sec. 272.12. Collections made by such 
intercepts shall be treated as lump sum or installment payments as 
discussed in paragraph (g) (1) and (2) of this section.

[[Page 687]]

    (4) Reduction in food stamp allotment. State agencies shall collect 
payments for inadvertent household error claims and intentional Program 
violation claims from households currently participating in the program 
by reducing the household's food stamp allotments. State agencies shall 
collect payments for administrative error claims from households 
currently participating in the program by reducing the household's food 
stamp allotments if the household prefers to use this method of 
repayment. Prior to reduction, the State agency shall inform the 
household of the appropriate formula for determining the amount of food 
stamps to be recovered each month and the effect of that formula on the 
household's allotment (i.e., the amount of food stamps the State agency 
expects will be recovered each month), and of the availability of other 
methods of repayment. If the household requests to make a lump sum cash 
and/or food stamp coupon payment as full or partial payment of the 
claim, the State agency shall accept this method of payment. The State 
agency shall reduce the household's allotment to recover any amounts of 
an inadvertent household error or intentional Program violation claim 
not repaid through a lump sum cash and/or food stamp coupon payment, 
unless a payment schedule has been negotiated with the household. The 
provision for the minimum benefit for households with one and two 
members only, as described in Sec. 273.10(e)(2)(ii)(C), shall apply to 
the allotment prior to reduction in accordance with this paragraph. If 
the full or remaining amount of the claim cannot be liquidated in 3 
years, the State agency may compromise the claim by reducing it to an 
amount that will allow the household to make restitution within 3 years. 
A State agency may use the full amount of the claim (including any 
amount compromised) to offset benefits in accordance with Sec. 273.17. 
The amount of food stamps to be recovered each month through allotment 
reduction shall be determined as follows:
    (i) Inadvertent household error claims. For inadvertent household 
error claims, the amount of food stamps shall be the greater of 10 
percent of the household's monthly allotment or $10 per month.
    (ii) Administrative error claims. For administrative error claims, 
the amount of food stamps to be recovered each month from a household 
choosing to use this method shall be negotiated with the household. 
Choice of this option is entirely up to the household and no household 
shall have its allotment reduced by an amount with which it does not 
agree for payment of an administrative error claim.
    (iii) Intentional Program violation claims. For intentional Program 
violation claims, the amount of food stamps shall be the greater of 20 
percent of the household's monthly entitlement or $10 per month.
    (5) Federal income tax refund offset program--(i) General 
requirements. State agencies which choose to implement the Federal 
income tax refund offset program (FTROP) shall:
    (A) Submit an amendment to their Plan of Operation as specified in 
Section 272.2(d)(1)(xii) of this chapter stating that they will comply 
with the requirements for FTROP and with the requirements for the 
Federal Salary Offset Program (salary offset). Such amendments shall be 
submitted to the appropriate FCS regional office no later than twelve 
months before the beginning of a State agency's first offset year.
    (B) Submit data for FTROP to FCS in the record formats specified by 
FCS and/or the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), and according to 
schedules and by means of magnetic tape, electronic data transmission or 
other method specified by FCS.
    (ii) Claims referable for offset. State agencies may submit for 
collection from Federal income tax refunds recipient claims which are 
past due and legally enforceable.
    (A) Such claims must be:
    (1) Only inadvertent household error claims or intentional Program 
violation claims. These claims shall be properly established according 
to the requirements of this section (which pertains to claims against 
households) and the requirements of section 273.16 (which pertains to 
disqualification for intentional Program violations). In addition, these 
claims shall be properly

[[Page 688]]

established no later than the date the State transmits its final request 
for IRS addresses for the particular offset year. Furthermore, the State 
agency shall have electronic records and/or paper documents showing that 
the claim was properly established. These records and documents include 
such items as claim demand letters, results of fair hearings, advance 
notices of disqualification hearings, results of such hearings, and 
records of payments.
    (2) Claims for which the State agency has verified that no 
individual who is jointly and severally liable as specified in paragraph 
(a) of this section is also currently participating in the FSP in the 
State.
    (3) Claims which meet at least the minimum dollar amount established 
by the IRS.
    (4) Claims for which the date of the initial demand letter is within 
10 years of January 31 of the offset year, except that claims reduced to 
final court judgments ordering individuals to pay the debt are not 
subject to this 10-year limitation.
    (5) Claims for which the State agency is receiving neither regular 
voluntary payments nor regular, involuntary payments such as wage 
garnishment. Claims for which a State agency has been receiving regular 
payments under paragraph (g)(2) of this section are considered past due 
and legally enforceable if the individual does not respond to a notice 
of default as specified in paragraph (g)(2) of this section.
    (6) Claims for which collection is not barred by a bankruptcy.
    (7) Claims for which the State agency has provided the individual 
with all of the notification and opportunities for review as specified 
in paragraphs (g)(5)(iii), (g)(5)(iv), (g)(5)(v) and (g)(5)(vi) of this 
section.
    (B) In addition:
    (1) All claims to be submitted for collection under FTROP shall be 
reduced by any amounts subject to collection from State income tax 
refunds or from other sources which may result in collections during the 
offset year.
    (2) If a claim to be submitted for collection under FTROP is a 
combination of two or more recipient claims, the date of the initial 
demand letter for each claim combined shall be within the 10-year range 
specified in paragraph (g)(5)(ii)(A)(4) of this section. Claims reduced 
to judgment shall not be combined with claims which are not reduced to 
judgment.
    (3) If a claim to be submitted under FTROP is apportioned between 
two or more individuals who are jointly and severally liable for the 
claim pursuant to paragraphs (a) and (f) of this section, the sum of the 
amounts submitted shall not exceed the total amount of the claim.
    (iii) 60-Day notice to individuals. (A) Prior to referring claims 
for collection under FTROP, the State agency shall provide individuals 
from whom it seeks to collect such claims with a notice, called a 60-day 
notice. For offset year 1996, State agencies have the option of 
providing the 60-day notice specified in paragraph (g)(5)(iv) of this 
section or in paragraph (g)(5)(x) of this section. For offset year 1997 
and subsequent years, State agencies shall provide the 60-day notice 
specified in paragraph (g)(5)(iv).
    (B) With the exception of such State-specific information as names 
and job titles and information required for State agency contacts, a 
State agency's 60-day notice shall contain only the information 
specified in paragraph (g)(5)(iv) of this section. In the certification 
letter required in paragraph (g)(5)(vii) of this section, the State 
agency shall include a statement that its 60-day notice conforms to this 
requirement. This requirement shall not apply to State agencies which 
choose to use the 60-day specified in paragraph (g)(5)(x) of this 
section for offset year 1996.
    (C) Unless otherwise notified by FCS, the State agency shall mail 
60-day notices for claims to be referred for collection through FTROP no 
later than October 1 preceding the offset year during which the claims 
would be offset.
    (D) The State agency shall mail 60-day notices using the address 
information provided by the IRS unless the State agency receives clear 
and concise notification from the taxpayer that notices from the State 
agency are to be sent to an address different from the address obtained 
from the IRS. Such clear and concise notification shall mean that the 
taxpayer has provided

[[Page 689]]

the State agency with written notification including the taxpayer's name 
and identifying number (which is generally the taxpayer's SSN), the 
taxpayer's new address, and the taxpayer's intent to have notices from 
the State agency sent to the new address. Claims for which 60-day 
notices addressed as required in this paragraph are returned as 
undeliverable may be referred for collection under FTROP.
    (iv) Contents of the 60-day notice. Except that the language set out 
in paragraph (g)(5)(iv)(C) of this section shall not be included in the 
notice for offset year 1996, the State agency's 60-day notice shall 
state that:
    (A) [Name of the State agency or an equivalent phrase] has records 
documenting that you, [the name of the individual], Social Security 
Number: [the individual's Social Security Number] are liable for [the 
unpaid balance of the recipient claim(s) the State agency intends to 
refer] resulting from overissued food stamp benefits. [The name of the 
State agency or equivalent phrase] has previously mailed or otherwise 
delivered demand letters notifying you about the claim, including the 
right to a fair hearing on the claim, and has made any other required 
collection efforts.
    (B) The Deficit Reduction Act of 1984, as amended, authorizes the 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to deduct such debts from tax refunds if 
they are past due and legally enforceable. [Name of the State agency or 
an equivalent phrase] has determined that your debt is past due and 
legally enforceable as specified by the Deficit Reduction Act of 1984, 
the IRS regulations, and Food Stamp Program (FSP) regulations. We intend 
to refer the claim for deduction from your Federal income tax refund 
unless you pay the claim within 60 days of the date of the notice or 
make other repayment arrangements acceptable to us.
    (C) If we refer your claim to the IRS, a charge for the 
administrative cost of collection will be added to your claim and that 
amount will also be deducted if the claim, or any portion of the claim, 
is deducted from your tax refund. This charge will be approximately [the 
amount provided by FCS].
    (D) All adults who were household members when excess food stamp 
benefits were issued to the household are jointly and severally liable 
for the value of those benefits, and collection of claims for such 
benefits may be pursued against all such individuals.
    (E) Our records do not show that the claim is being paid according 
to either a voluntary agreement with us or through scheduled, 
involuntary payments. To pay the claim voluntarily or to discuss it, you 
should contact: [an office, administrative unit and/or individual, the 
contact's street address or post office box, and a toll-free or collect 
telephone number].
    (F) You are entitled to request a review of the intended collection 
action. We must receive your request for review within 60 days of the 
date of this notice. Such a request must be written, must be submitted 
to the address provided in this notice and must contain your Social 
Security Number. We will not refer your claim for offset while our 
review is pending.
    (G) The claim is not legally enforceable if a bankruptcy prevents 
collection of the claim.
    (H) You may want to contact your local office of the IRS before 
filing your Federal income tax return. This is true where you are filing 
a joint return, and your spouse is not liable for the food stamp claim 
and has income and withholding and/or estimated Federal income tax 
payments. In such circumstances your spouse may be entitled to receive 
his or her portion of any joint refund. Your own liability for this 
claim, including any charge for administrative costs, may still be 
collected from your share of such a joint refund.
    (I) If you request a review of our intent to collect the claim from 
your income tax refund, you should provide documentation showing that at 
least one of the items listed below is incorrect for the claim cited in 
this notice. If you do not have such documentation, for example a 
cancelled check, you should explain in detail why you believe that the 
claim is not collectible under the Federal Income Tax Refund Offset 
Program.
    (J) The claim cited in this notice is subject to collection from 
your tax refund for the following reasons:

[[Page 690]]

    (1) The claim was properly established according to Food Stamp 
Program regulations and was caused by an inadvertent household error or 
an intentional Program violation;
    (2) No individual who is jointly and severally liable for the claim 
is also currently participating in the Food Stamp Program in [the name 
of State initiating the collection action];
    (3) The claim is for at least [the minimum dollar amount required by 
the IRS];
    (4) The date of the initial demand letter for the claim is within 10 
years of January 31, [the offset year]. If the claim was reduced to a 
final court judgment ordering you to pay the debt, this 10-year period 
does not apply, and the date of the initial demand letter may be older 
than 10 years; and
    (5) We are neither receiving voluntary payments pursuant to an 
agreed upon schedule of payments as provided in current Food Stamp 
Program regulations nor are we receiving scheduled, involuntary payments 
such as wage garnishment. Claims for which we have been receiving 
regular payments under current Food Stamp Program regulations are 
considered past due and legally enforceable if you did not respond to a 
notice of default.
    (K) In addition, collection of the claim is not barred by 
bankruptcy.
    (v) State agency action on requests for review. (A) For all written 
requests for review received within 60 days of the date of the 60-day 
notice, the State agency shall determine whether or not the subject 
claims are past due and legally enforceable, and shall notify 
individuals in writing of the result of such determinations.
    (B) The State agency shall determine whether or not claims are past 
due and legally enforceable based on a review of its records, and of 
documentation, evidence or other information the individual may submit.
    (C) If the State agency decides that a claim for which a review 
request is received is past due and legally enforceable, it shall notify 
the individual that:
    (1) The claim was determined past due and legally enforceable, and 
the reason for that determination. Acceptable reasons for such a 
determination include the individual's failure to provide adequate 
documentation that the claim is not past due or legally enforceable;
    (2) The State agency intends to refer the claim to the IRS for 
offset;
    (3) The individual may ask FCS to review the State agency decision. 
FCS must receive the request for review within 30 days of the date of 
the State agency decision. FCS will provide the individual a written 
response to such a request stating its decision and the reasons for its 
decision. The claim will not be referred to the IRS for offset pending 
the FCS decision; and
    (4) A request for an FCS review must include the individual's SSN 
and must be sent to the appropriate FCS regional office. The State 
agency decision shall provide the address of that regional office, 
including in that address the phrase ``Tax Offset Review.''
    (D) If the State agency determines that the claim is not past due or 
legally enforceable, in addition to notifying the individual that the 
claim will not be referred for offset, the State agency shall take any 
actions required by food stamp regulations with respect to establishing 
the claim, including holding appropriate hearings and initiating 
collection action.
    (E) The State agency shall not refer for offset a claim for which a 
timely State agency review request is received unless by October 31 
preceding the offset year the State agency determines the claim past due 
and legally enforceable, and notifies the individual of that decision as 
specified in paragraphs (g)(5)(v)(C)(1), (g)(5)(v)(C)(2), and 
(g)(5)(v)(C)(3) of this section.
    (vi) FCS action on appeals of State agency reviews.
    (A) FCS shall act on all timely requests for FCS reviews of State 
agency review decisions as specified in paragraph (g)(5)(v)(C) of this 
section. A request for FCS review is timely if it is received by FCS 
within 30 days of the date of the State agency's review decision.
    (B) If a timely request for FCS review is received, and the State 
agency's decision is dated on or before October 31 of the year prior to 
the offset year, FCS shall:
    (1) Complete a review and notification as specified in paragraphs

[[Page 691]]

(g)(5)(vi)(C), (g)(5)(vi)(D), and (g)(5)(vi)(E) of this section, 
including providing State agencies and individuals the required 
notification of its decision; or
    (2) Notify the State agency that it has not completed its review and 
that the State agency must delete the claims in question from files to 
be certified to FCS according to paragraph (g)(5)(vii) of this section. 
If FCS fails to timely notify the State agency and because of that 
failure a claim is offset which FCS later finds does not meet the 
criteria specified in paragraph (g)(5)(ii) of this section, FCS will 
provide funds to the State agency for refunding the charge for the 
offset fee.
    (C) If a timely request for FCS review is received, and the State 
agency's decision is dated after October 31 of the year prior to the 
offset year, FCS shall complete a review as specified in paragraphs 
(g)(5)(vi)(D), (g)(5)(vi)(E) and (g)(5)(vi)(F) of this section, but the 
claim shall not be referred for offset as specified in paragraph 
(g)(5)(v)(E) of this section.
    (D) When FCS receives an individual's request to review a State 
agency decision, FCS shall:
    (1) Request pertinent documentation from the State agency about the 
claim. Such documentation shall include such things as printouts of 
electronic records and/or copies of claim demand letters, results of 
fair hearings, advance notices of disqualification hearings, the results 
of such hearings, records of payments, 60-day notices, review requests 
and documentation, decision letters, and pertinent records of such 
things as telephone conversations; and
    (2) Decide whether the State agency correctly determined the claim 
in question is past due and legally enforceable.
    (E) If FCS finds that the State agency correctly determined that the 
claim is past due and legally enforceable, FCS will notify the State 
agency and individual of its decision, and the reason(s) for that 
decision, including notice to the individual that any further appeal 
must be made through the courts.
    (F) If FCS finds that the State agency incorrectly determined that 
the claim is past due and legally enforceable, FCS will notify the State 
agency and individual of its decision, and the reason(s) for that 
decision. FCS will also notify the State agency about any corrective 
action the State agency must take with respect to the claim and related 
procedures.
    (vii) Referral of claims for offset. (A) State agencies shall submit 
to FCS a certified file of claims for collection through FTROP by the 
date specified by FCS in schedules which FCS will provide as stated in 
paragraph (g)(5)(i) of this section. At the same time State agencies 
shall also provide to their FCS regional office a letter which 
specifically certifies that all claims contained in that certified file 
meet the criteria for claims referable for FTROP as specified in 
paragraph (g)(5)(ii) of this section, and that for all such claims a 
notice and opportunity to request a review as required in paragraphs 
(g)(5)(iii), (g)(5)(iv), (g)(5)(v) and (g)(5)(vi) of this section have 
been provided. The certification letter shall also state that the State 
agency has not included in the certified file of claims any claim which, 
as provided in paragraph (g)(5)(vi) of this section, FCS notified the 
State agency is not past due or is not legally enforceable, or any claim 
for which FCS notified the State agency that it has not completed a 
timely requested review, or for which the State agency has not completed 
a timely requested review. Finally, the certification letter shall also 
state that with the exception of State-specific information such as 
names and positions and State-specific information required for State 
agency contacts, the State agency's 60-day notice contains only the 
information specified in paragraph (g)(5)(iv) of this section.
    (B) The State agency shall provide to FCS the name, address and 
toll-free or collect telephone numbers of State agency contacts to be 
included in IRS notices of offset. State agencies shall state in the 
letter required in paragraph (g)(5)(vii)(A) of this section how they 
determined that such information is accurate and shall provide FCS 
updates of that information if and when that information changes.

[[Page 692]]

    (viii) State agency actions on offsets made. (A) Promptly after 
receiving notice from FCS that offsets have been made, the State agency 
shall notify affected individuals of offsets made, including the amount 
charged for offset fees, and the status of the claims in question.
    (B) As close in time as possible to the notice of offset required in 
paragraph (g)(5)(viii)(A) of this section, the State agency shall refund 
to the individual (as required by paragraph (i)(4) of this section) any 
over collection which resulted from the offset of the individual's 
Federal income tax refund.
    (C) If an offset results from a State agency including in the 
certified file of claims required by paragraph (g)(5)(vii)(A) of this 
section a claim which does not meet the criteria specified in paragraph 
(g)(5)(ii) of this section, the State agency shall refund the amount 
offset to the individual, including any amounts collected to pay for the 
offset fee charged by the IRS. The State agency may claim any such 
latter amount as an allowable administrative cost under part 277 of this 
chapter. The State agency shall not be responsible for refunding any 
portion of the charges for offset fees incurred for IRS reversals of 
offsets when, for example, the IRS refunds amounts offset, including 
offset fees, to taxpayers who properly notified the IRS that they are 
not liable for claims which were collected in whole or part from their 
share of a joint Federal income tax refund.
    (ix) Monitoring and reporting offset activities. State agencies 
shall monitor FTROP activities and shall take all necessary steps to:
    (A) Update IRS files, reducing the amounts of or deleting claims 
from those files to reflect payments made after referral to FCS, or 
deleting claims which for other reasons no longer meet the criteria for 
being collectible under FTROP.
    (B) Promptly refund to the individual any over collection of claims 
as required in paragraph (g)(5)(viii)(B) of this section.
    (C) Annually and no later than the tenth of October of the year 
prior to the offset year report in writing to the FCS regional office 
the number of 60-day notices mailed and the total dollar value of the 
claims associated with those notices.
    (D) Submit data security and voluntary payment reports as required 
by FCS and the IRS.
    (E) Report collections of all recipient claims collected under the 
procedures of paragraph (g)(5) of this section as required by paragraph 
(i)(2) of this section.
    (x) Contents of the alternate 60-day notice. As specified in 
paragraph (g)(5)(iii)(A) of this section, for offset year 1996 State 
agencies may use a 60-day notice specifying the following information:
    (A) The State agency has records documenting that the individual, 
identified with his or her Social Security Number, is liable for a 
specified, unpaid balance of a claim for overissued food stamp benefits, 
and that the State agency has notified the individual about the claim 
and made prior collection efforts as required by the Food Stamp Program. 
The notice must also state that the claim is past due and legally 
enforceable.
    (B) The Deficit Reduction Act of 1984, as amended by the Emergency 
Unemployment Act of 1991, authorizes the Internal Revenue Service to 
deduct such debts from tax refunds, and the State agency intends to 
refer the claim for such deduction unless the individuals pays the claim 
within 60 days of the date of the notice, or makes other repayment 
arrangements acceptable to the State agency.
    (C) Instructions about how to pay the claim, including the name, 
address and telephone number of an office, administrative unit or person 
in the State agency who can discuss the claim and the intended offset 
with the individual.
    (D) The following information about requesting a review of the 
intended offset:
    (1) The individual is entitled to request a review of the intended 
referral for offset;
    (2) The State agency will not act on review requests which it 
receives later than 60 days after the date of the 60-day notice;
    (3) Claims for which timely review requests have been received will 
not be referred for offset while under review;

[[Page 693]]

    (4) A review request must provide evidence or documentation why the 
individual believes that the claim is not past due or is not legally 
enforceable;
    (5) A review request is not considered received until the State 
agency receives such evidence or documentation; and
    (6) A review request must contain the individual's Social Security 
Number.
    (E) The individual should contact the State agency if he or she 
believes that a bankruptcy proceeding prevents collection of the claim 
or if the claim has been discharged in bankruptcy.
    (F) The individual may want to contact the Internal Revenue Service 
before filing his or her Federal income tax return if the individual is 
married, filing a joint return, and if his or her spouse is not liable 
for the food stamp claim and has income and withholding and/or estimated 
Federal income tax payments. In such circumstances the spouse may be 
entitled to receive his or her portion of any joint refund. False claims 
concerning such liability may subject individuals to legal action.
    (G) All individuals are jointly and severally liable for overpayment 
of food stamps if they were adult household members when the food stamps 
were overissued.
    (6) Federal salary offset program--(i) Claims subject to salary 
offset. All recipient claims submitted by State agencies participating 
in the Federal income tax refund offset program (FTROP) shall be subject 
to the matching procedures specified in this paragraph. Individuals 
identified by the match shall be subject to the salary offset procedures 
specified in this paragraph.
    (ii) Identification of recipient claims owed by Federal employees. 
(A) FCS will match all recipient claims submitted by State agencies 
participating in FTROP against Federal employment records maintained by 
the Department of Defense and the United States Postal Service. FCS will 
remove recipient claims matched during this procedure from the list of 
recipient claims to be referred to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) 
for collection through FTROP.
    (B) When FCS receives a list of Federal employees matched against 
recipient claims for a particular State agency, it will notify the State 
agency in writing accompanied by a data security and confidentiality 
agreement containing the requirements specified in paragraph 
(g)(6)(ii)(C) of this section for the State agency to sign and return. 
When that agreement is returned, signed by an appropriate official of 
the State agency, FCS will provide the list of matched Federal employees 
to the State agency.
    (C) State agencies which receive lists of matched employees shall 
take the actions specified in this paragraph to ensure the security and 
confidentiality of information about those employees and their apparent 
debts, and shall ensure that any contractors or other non-State agency 
entities to which the records may be disclosed also take these actions:
    (1) By such means as card keys, identification badges and security 
personnel, limit access to computer facilities handling the data to 
persons who need to perform official duties related to the salary offset 
procedures. By means of a security package, limit access to the computer 
system itself to such persons;
    (2) During off-duty hours, keep magnetic tapes and other hard copy 
records of data in locked cabinets in locked rooms. During on-duty 
hours, maintain those records under conditions that restrict access to 
persons who need them in connection with official duties related to 
salary offset procedures;
    (3) Use the data solely for salary offset purposes as specified in 
paragraph (g)(6) of this section, including not extracting, duplicating 
or disseminating the data except for salary offset purposes;
    (4) Retain the data only as long as needed for salary offset 
purposes as specified in paragraph (g)(6) of this section, or as 
otherwise required by FCS;
    (5) Destroy the data by shredding, burning or electronic erasure; 
and
    (6) Advise all personnel having access to the data about the 
confidential nature of the data and their responsibility to abide by the 
security and confidentiality provisions stated in paragraph 
(g)(6)(ii)(C) of this section.
    (D) Prior to taking any action to collect recipient claims as 
specified in paragraph (g)(6)(iii) of this section, State agencies shall 
review the claims

[[Page 694]]

records of matched Federal employees to verify the amount of the 
recipient claim owed, and to remove from the list of claims any 
recipient claims which have been paid, which are being paid according to 
an agreed to schedule, or which for other reasons are not collectible.
    (iii) State agency advance notice of salary offset. (A) Following 
the review specified in paragraph (g)(6)(ii)(D) of this section, State 
agencies shall provide each Federal employee verified as owing a 
recipient claim (debtor) with an advance notice of salary offset 
(advance notice). This advance notice shall be mailed to the debtor at 
the address provided by FCS, or shall be otherwise provided, within 60 
days of State agency receipt of the list specified in paragraph 
(g)(6)(ii)(B) of this section.
    (B) Within 90 days of the date of the advance notice, the State 
agency shall refer to FCS all claims for which the State agency does not 
receive timely and adequate response as specified in the advance notice. 
Such referrals shall consist of a copy of the advance notice sent to the 
debtor and copies of records relating to the recipient claim. Records 
relating to the recipient claims include such things as copies of 
printouts of electronic records and/or copies of claim demand letters, 
results of fair hearings, advance notices of disqualification hearings, 
the results of such hearings, records of payments, review requests and 
documentation, decision letters, and pertinent records of such things as 
telephone conversations.
    (C) The advance notice shall state that:
    (1) According to State agency records the debtor is liable for a 
claim for a specified dollar amount due to receiving excess food stamp 
benefits. State agencies are encouraged to include as much other 
information about the claim as possible, including such things as 
whether it was caused by household error or intentional Program 
violation, the date of the initial demand letter, any hearings or court 
actions which relate to the claim, and what, if any, payments have 
reduced the amount of the original claim;
    (2) Through a computer match the debtor was found to be employed by 
[the name and address of the employing agency of the debtor]. The 
computer match was conducted under the authority of and according to 
procedures required by the Privacy Act of 1974, as amended;
    (3) Collection from the wages of Federal and USPS employees for 
debts such as food stamp recipient claims is authorized by the Debt 
Collection Act of 1982. The claim will be referred to FCS for such 
collection action unless within 30 days of the date of the advance 
notice the State agency receives either:
    (i) Payment of the claim in full. Claims of $50 or less shall be 
paid in full within 30 days or they will be referred to FCS for 
collection from the individual's Federal salary; or
    (ii) The first installment payment for the claim. Claims of more 
than $50, if not paid in full within 30 days, must be paid in 
installments of at least $50 a month. Debtors may pay more than $50 on 
any installment payment. The advance notice shall state the monthly due 
date of installment payments and that if a monthly installment payment 
of at least $50 is not received by the due date, the claim will be 
referred to FCS for offset from the individual's Federal salary with no 
further opportunity to enter a voluntary repayment agreement;
    (4) The name, address and a toll-free or collect telephone number of 
a State agency contact (an individual or unit) for repayment and/or 
discussion of the claim; and
    (5) Debtors may submit documentation to State agencies showing such 
things as payments of claims or other circumstances which would prevent 
collection of claims. Unless the State agency receives such 
documentation within 30 calendar days of the date of the advance notice 
and the documentation clearly shows that the claim has been paid or is 
not legally collectible, the State agency shall refer the claim to FCS 
for collection from the debtor's salary. The State agency shall notify 
debtors in writing when claims for which an advance notice was issued 
will not be referred for collection from salaries. Debtors have the 
right to a formal appeal to FCS. Notification about how to make such 
appeals is required and will be provided to debtors

[[Page 695]]

before any collection action from salaries is taken.
    (iv) State agency retention and reporting of collections. (A) State 
agencies shall retain collections of recipient claims paid voluntarily 
to State agencies and to FCS through salary offsets at the rates 
specified in paragraph (h) of this section for the appropriate reporting 
period. From time to time as volume warrants, FCS will report and 
transfer amounts collected from salaries to State agencies. Collections 
by State agencies and by FCS on all such claims shall be reported as 
appropriate.
    (B) If a debtor fails to make an installment payment, within 60 days 
of the date the payment was due, State agencies shall refer the claim to 
FCS, reporting the default, the dollar amount collected and the balance 
due.
    (v) FCS actions on claims referred by State agencies. Departmental 
procedures at 7 CFR 3.51-3.68 shall apply to claims referred by State 
agencies to FCS as required by paragraphs (g)(6)(iii)(B) and 
(g)(6)(iv)(B) of this section subject to the following modifications:
    (A) In addition to the definitions set forth at 7 CFR 3.52, the term 
``debts'' shall further be defined to include recipient claims 
established according to this section; and the terms ``State agency'' 
and ``FCS'' shall be defined as set forth in section 271.2 of this 
chapter.
    (B) Pursuant to 7 CFR 3.34(c)(4) and 7 CFR 3.55(d), the Secretary 
has determined that collection of interest, penalties and administrative 
costs provided at 7 CFR 3.65 is not in the best interests of the United 
States and hereby waives collection of such charges.
    (C) In addition to providing the right to inspect and copy 
Departmental records as specified at 7 CFR 3.60(a), the Secretary shall 
provide copies of records relating to the debt in response to timely 
requests. For a request to be timely, FCS must receive it within 30 
calendar days of the date of the notice of intent.
    (D) Pursuant to 5 CFR 550.1104(d)(6), an opportunity to establish a 
written repayment agreement provided at 7 CFR 3.61 shall not be 
provided.
    (E) The notice of intent for FSP salary offset shall comply with the 
requirements of the Departmental notice of intent which are set forth at 
7 CFR 3.55, subject to the following modifications:
    (1) In addition to the statement that the debtor has the right to 
inspect and copy Departmental records relating to the debt, the notice 
of intent shall state that if timely requested by the debtor, the 
Secretary shall provide the debtor copies of such records. It shall 
further advise, as required by 7 CFR 3.60(a), that to be timely such 
requests must be received within 30 days of the date of the notice of 
intent; and
    (2) The statement of the right to enter a written repayment 
agreement provided by 7 CFR 3.55(f) shall not be included.
    (h) Retention rates. The following retention rates shall apply for 
claims collected by the State agency, including the value of allotment 
reductions for the purpose of collecting claims but not allotment 
reductions due to disqualification:
    (1) For amounts collected prior to October 1, 1990, the State agency 
shall retain 25 percent of the value of inadvertent household error 
claims collected and 50 percent of the value of intentional Program 
violation claims collected;
    (2) For amounts collected during the period October 1, 1990 through 
September 30, 1995, the State agency shall retain 10 percent of the 
value of inadvertent household error claims collected and 25 percent of 
the value of intentional Program violation claims collected;
    (3) For amounts collected on or after October 1, 1995, the State 
agency shall retain 25 percent of the value of inadvertent household 
error claims collected and 50 percent of the value of intentional 
Program Violation claims collected;
    (4) The State agency shall not retain any percentage of the value of 
administrative error claims collected.
    (i) Submission of payments. (1) The State agency shall retain the 
value of funds collected for inadvertent household error, intentional 
Program violation, or administrative error claims rather than forwarding 
the payments to FCS. This amount includes the total

[[Page 696]]

value of allotment reductions to collect claims, but does not include 
the value of benefits not issued as a result of a household member being 
disqualified. The State's grant and letter of credit will be established 
or amended on a quarterly basis to reflect the State agency's retention 
of the value of claims collected as specified in paragraph (h) of this 
section unless the State agency requests or has requested that payment 
be by check. The State agency may request that FCS accept checks from 
the State for FCS-209 amounts due FCS, or that FCS pay the State by 
check for FCS-209 amounts due the State. If the State agency fails to 
pay FCS the amount due as reported on the FCS-209, FCS shall offset the 
amount due from the State's letter of credit. For FCS-209 reporting 
purposes, State agencies shall calculate the retention amount using the 
appropriate rate specified in paragraph (h) of this section which is in 
effect during the reporting period for the report. For those claims 
collected in Fiscal Year 1990 or earlier for which adjustments are made 
and reported in Fiscal Year 1991 or 1992, States may request a 
correction to reflect the difference between the old, higher rate 
(paragraph (h)(1) of this section) which is applicable to those claims, 
and the new, lower rate (paragraph (h)(2) of this section) at which the 
adjustments to those claims were reported on the FCS-209. One request 
for correction for each of fiscal years 1991 and 1992 may be filed with 
FCS after the fiscal year, but no later than November 30, 1991, for 
Fiscal Year 1991 reporting and no later than November 30, 1992, for 
Fiscal Year 1992 reporting. The request must be in writing, must include 
appropriate verifying documentation, and must reflect the net effect of 
all increases and decreases resulting from the application of the old 
retention rate.
    (2) Each State agency shall submit quarterly a Form FCS-209, Status 
of Claims Against Households, to detail the State's activities relating 
to claims against households. This report is due no later than 30 days 
after the end of each calendar year quarter and shall be submitted to 
FCS even if the State agency has not collected any payments. In addition 
to reporting the amount of funds recovered from inadvertent household 
error and intentional Program violation claims each quarter on Form FCS-
209, the State agency shall also report these amounts on other letter of 
credit documents as required. In accounting for inadvertent household 
error and intentional Program violation claims collections, the State 
agency shall include cash or coupon repayments and the value of 
allotments recovered or offset by restoration of lost benefits. However, 
the value of benefits not issued during periods of disqualification 
shall not be considered recovered allotments and shall not be used to 
offset an intentional Program violation claim. In addition, each State 
agency shall establish controls to ensure that officials responsible for 
intentional Program violation determinations will not benefit from the 
State share of recoveries.
    (3) The State agency may retain any amounts recovered on a claim 
being handled as an inadvertent household error claim prior to obtaining 
a determination by an administrative disqualification hearing offical or 
a court of appropriate jurisdiction that intentional Program violation 
was committed, or receiving from an individual either a signed waiver or 
consent agreement, at the rate applicable to intentional Program 
violation claims, once the determination or signed document is obtained. 
In such cases, the State agency shall include a note in an attachment to 
the quarterly reporting form specified in paragraph (h)(2) of this 
section which shows the additional amounts being retained on amounts 
already recovered as a result of the change in status of the claim.
    (4) If a household has overpaid a claim, the State agency shall pay 
the household any amounts overpaid as soon as possible after the 
overpayment becomes known. The household shall be paid by whatever 
method the State agency deems appropriate considering the household's 
circumstances. Overpaid amounts of a claim which have previously been 
reported as collected via the FCS-209 and which have been repaid to the 
household shall be reported in the appropriate column on the FCS-209 for 
the quarter in which the repayment occurred. The amount

[[Page 697]]

of the repayment shall be subtracted from the total amount collected. 
The appropriate retention rate shall be applied to the reduced 
collection total.
    (5) In cases where FCS has billed a State agency for negligence, any 
amounts collected from households which were caused by the State's 
negligence will be credited by FCS. When submitting these payments, the 
State agency shall include a note as an attachment to the quarterly 
reporting form specified in paragraph (h)(2) of this section which shows 
the amount that should be credited against the State's bill.
    (j) Returned coupons. If coupon books collected from households as 
payment for claims are returned intact and in usable form, the State 
agency may return them to coupon inventory. The State agency shall 
destroy any coupons or coupon books which are not returned to inventory 
in accordance with the procedures outlined in Sec. 274.7(f).
    (k) Claims discharged through bankruptcy. State agencies shall act 
on behalf of, and as, FCS in any bankruptcy proceeding against bankrupt 
households owing food stamp claims. State agencies shall possess any 
rights, priorities, interests, liens or privileges, and shall 
participate in any distribution of assets, to the same extent as FCS. 
Acting as FCS, State agencies shall have the power and authority to file 
objections to discharge, proofs of claims, exceptions to discharge, 
petitions for revocation of discharge, and any other documents, motions 
or objections which FCS might have filed. Any amounts collected under 
this authority shall be transmitted to FCS as provided in paragraph (h) 
of this section.
    (l) Accounting procedures. Each State agency shall be responsible 
for maintaining an accounting system for monitoring claims against 
households. At a minimum, the accounting system shall be designed to 
readily accomplish the following:
    (1) Document the circumstances which resulted in a claim, the 
procedures used to calculate the claim, the methods, used to collect the 
claim and, if applicable, the circumstances which resulted in suspension 
or termination of collection action.
    (2) Identify those situations in which an amount not yet restored to 
a household can be used to offset a claim owed by the household.
    (3) Identify those households that have failed to make installment 
payments on their claims.
    (4) Document how much money was collected in payment of a claim and 
how much was submitted to FCS.
    (5) Identify at certification household that owe outstanding 
payments on a previously issued claim determination. At the time the 
household is certified and receives an initial allotment (as specified 
at Sec. 273.17(d)(4)), the initial allotment, whether paid retroactively 
or prospectively, shall not be reduced to offset claims.
    (m) Interstate claims collection. In cases where a household moves 
out of the area under a State agency's jurisdiction, the State agency 
should initiate or continue collection action against the household for 
any overissuance to the household which occurred while it was under the 
State agency's jurisdiction. The State agency which overissued benefits 
to the household shall have the first opportunity to collect any 
overissuance. However, if the State agency which overissued benefits to 
the household does not take prompt action to collect, then the State 
agency which administers the area into which the household moves should 
initiate action to collect the overissuance. Prior to initiating action 
to collect such overissuances, the State agency which administers the 
area into which the household moves shall contact the State agency which 
overissued benefits to ascertain that it does not intend to pursue 
prompt collection. The State share of any collected claims, as provided 
in Sec. 273.18(h), shall be retained by the State agency which collects 
the overissuance.

[Amdt. 242, 48 FR 6861, Feb. 15, 1983]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting 
Sec. 273.18, see the List of CFR Sections Affected in the Finding Aids 
section of this volume.
Sec. 273.19  [Reserved]


<R05>
Sec. 273.20  SSI cash-out.

    (a) Ineligibility. No individual who receives supplemental security 
income

[[Page 698]]

(SSI) benefits and/or State supplementary payments as a resident of 
California is eligible to receive food stamp benefits. The Secretary of 
the Department of Health and Human Services has determined that the SSI 
payments in California have been specifically increased to include the 
value of the food stamp allotment.
    (b) Receipt of SSI benefits. In California, an individual must 
actually receive, not merely have applied for, SSI benefits to be 
determined ineligible for the food stamp program. If the State agency 
provides payments at least equal to the level of SSI benefits to 
individuals who have applied for but are awaiting an SSI eligibility 
determination, receipt of these substitute payments will terminate the 
individual's eligibility for food stamp benefits. Once SSI benefits are 
received, the individual will remain ineligible for food stamp benefits, 
even during months in which receipt of the SSI benefits is interrupted, 
or suspended, until the individual is terminated from the SSI program.
    (c) Income and resources. In California, the income and resources of 
the SSI recipient living in a household shall not be considered in 
determining eligibility or level of benefits of the household, as 
specified in Sec. 273.11(d).

[Amdt. 132, 43 FR 47889, Oct. 17, 1978, as amended by Amdt. 132, 44 FR 
33383, June 8, 1979. Redesignated at 45 FR 7217, Jan. 31, 1980, and 
amended by Amdt. 237, 47 FR 57669, Dec. 28, 1982; Amdt. 269, 51 FR 
10793, Mar. 28, 1986; Amdt. 356, 59 FR 29713, June 9, 1994; Amdt. 364, 
61 FR 54320, Oct. 17, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 273.21  Monthly Reporting and Retrospective Budgeting (MRRB).

    (a) System design. This section provides for an MRRB system for 
determining household eligibility and benefits. For included households, 
this system replaces the prospective budgeting system provided in the 
preceding sections of this part. The MRRB system provides for the use of 
retrospective information in calculating household benefits, normally 
based on information submitted by the household in monthly reports. The 
State agency shall establish an MRRB system as follows:
    (1) In establishing either a one-month or a two-month MRRB system, 
the State agency shall use the same system it uses in its AFDC Program 
unless it has been granted a waiver by FCS. Differences between a one-
month and a two-month system are described in paragraph (d) of this 
section.
    (2) The State agency shall determine eligibility, either 
prospectively or retrospectively, on the same basis that it uses for its 
AFDC program, unless it has been granted a waiver by FCS.
    (3) The household shall be certified for a continuous period of up 
to twelve months, but for no less than six months. These limits may be 
waived for certain categories of households if the State agency can 
demonstrate that the waiver will improve the administration of the 
program.
    (4) Budgeting waivers. FCS may approve waivers of the budgeting 
requirements of this section to conform to budgeting procedures in the 
AFDC program, except for households excluded from retrospective 
budgeting under paragraph (b) of this section.
    (b) Included and excluded households. The establishment of either a 
monthly reporting or retrospective budgeting system is a State agency 
option. Certain households are specifically excluded from both monthly 
reporting and retrospective budgeting. A household that is included in a 
monthly reporting system must be retrospectively budgeted. Households 
not required to submit monthly reports may have their benefits 
determined on either a prospective or retrospective basis at the State 
agency's option, unless specifically excluded from retrospective 
budgeting.
    (1) The following households are excluded from both monthly 
reporting and retrospective budgeting:
    (i) Migrant or seasonal farmworker households.
    (ii) Households in which all members are homeless individuals.
    (iii) Households with no earned income in which all adult members 
are elderly or disabled.
    (2) Households residing on an Indian reservation where there was no 
monthly reporting system in operation on March 25, 1994 are excluded 
from monthly reporting.

[[Page 699]]

    (c) Information on MRRB. At the certification and recertification 
interview, the State agency shall provide the household with the 
following:
    (1) An oral explanation of the purpose of MRRB;
    (2) A copy of the monthly report and an explanation of how to 
complete and file it;
    (3) An explanation that information required to be reported on the 
monthly report is the only reporting requirement for such information;
    (4) An explanation of what the household shall verify when it 
submits a monthly report and how it will verify it;
    (5) A telephone number (toll-free number or a number where collect 
calls will be accepted outside the local calling area) which the 
household may call to ask questions or to obtain help in completing the 
monthly report; and
    (6) Written explanations of this information.
    (7) Special assistance. The State agency shall provide special 
assistance in completing and filing monthly reports to households whose 
adult members are all either mentally or physically handicapped or are 
non-English speaking or otherwise lacking in reading and writing skills 
such that they cannot complete and file the required reports.
    (d) One and two-month systems. Each State agency shall adopt either 
a one-month or two-month MRRB system. A one-month system shall have 
either one or two beginning months in the certification period and a 
two-month system shall have two beginning months. Except for beginning 
months in sequence as described in the preceding sentence, the State 
agency shall not consider as a beginning month any month which 
immediately follows a month in which a household is certified.
    (1) One-month system. In the one-month system, the issuance month 
immediately follows its corresponding budget month.
    (2) Two-month system. In the two-month system, the issuance month is 
the second month following its corresponding budget month. There are two 
beginning months of participation in this system, the first month and 
the following month.
    (e) Determining eligibility for households not certified under the 
beginning months' procedures of Sec. 273.21(g). The State agency shall 
determine eligibility consistent with paragraph (a)(2) of this section 
and in accordance with either of the following options.
    (1) Prospective eligibility. The State agency shall determine 
eligibility by considering all factors of eligibility prospectively for 
each of the issuance months.
    (2) Retrospective eligibility. The State agency shall determine 
eligibility by considering all factors of eligibility retrospectively 
using the appropriate budget month except for residency and compliance 
with the requirements regarding social security numbers. Compliance with 
work registration provisions shall be considered as of the issuance 
month or month of application. The 60-day time frame for determining the 
applicability of the voluntary quit provision of Sec. 273.7(n) shall be 
measured by the State agency from the date of application.
    (f) Calculating allotments for households following the beginning 
months--(1) Household composition. (i) If eligibility is determined 
retrospectively the State agency shall determine the household's 
composition as of the last day of the budget month.
    (ii) If eligibility is determined prospectively (during the 
beginning months or for households processed under paragraph (e)(1) of 
this section), the State agency shall determine the household's 
composition as of the issuance month.
    (iii) In a two-month system, the following provisions shall apply 
with regard to a household which reports, in the month between the 
budget month and the corresponding issuance month, that it has gained a 
new member.
    (A) The State agency shall use the same household composition for 
determining the household's eligibility that it uses for calculating the 
household's benefit level.
    (B) If the new member is not already certified to receive food 
stamps in another household participating within the State, the new 
member's income, deductible expenses, and resources from the issuance 
month shall be considered in determining the household's

[[Page 700]]

eligibility and benefit level. If the new member had been providing 
income to the household on an ongoing basis prior to becoming a member 
of the household, the State agency shall exclude the previously provided 
income in determining the household's issuance month benefits and 
eligibility.
    (C) If the individual has moved out of one household receiving food 
stamps within the State and into another, with no break in 
participation, the State agency shall use the individual's income, 
deductible expenses, and resources from the budget month in determining 
benefits to be provided in the issuance month. The State agency shall 
include such an individual and the individual's income, deductible 
expenses, and resources in determining the issuance month eligibility 
and benefit level of either the household from which the individual has 
moved or the household into which the individual has moved, but not 
both. In determining the issuance month eligibility and benefit level of 
the household into which the individual has moved, the State agency 
shall disregard budget month income received by the new member from a 
terminated source.
    (D) The State agency may add new members to the household effective 
either the month the household reports the gain of a new household 
member or the first day of the issuance month following the month the 
household reports the gain of a new member. The benefits shall not be 
prorated.
    (iv) The State agency shall add a previously excluded member who was 
disqualified for an intentional program violation or failure to comply 
with workfare or work requirements, was ineligible because of failure to 
comply with the social security number requirement, or was previously an 
ineligible alien retrospectively to the household the month after the 
disqualification period ends. All other previously excluded members 
shall be added in accordance with the procedures in paragraph 
(f)(1)(iii)(B) of this section, using the new member's issuance month 
income and expenses.
    (2) Income and deductions. For the household members as determined 
in accordance with paragraph (f)(1) of this section, the State agency 
shall calculate the allotment using the household members' income and 
deductions from the budget month, except as follows:
    (i) The State agency shall annualize self-employment income which is 
received other than monthly, in accordance with Sec. 273.11(a). Such 
income shall be budgeted either prospectively or retrospectively and 
shall not affect more benefit months than the number of months in the 
period over which it is annualized or prorated. Except that, households 
which receive self-employment income from a farm operation monthly but 
incur irregular expenses to produce such self-employment farm income 
shall be given the option to annualize the self-employment farm income 
and expenses over a 12-month period.
    (ii) The State agency shall prorate contract income received over a 
period of less than one year and either prospectively or retrospectively 
budget such income. Such income shall not effect more benefit months 
than the number of months in the period over which it is prorated.
    (iii) Earned and unearned educational income shall be prorated over 
the period it is intended to cover in accordance with 
Sec. 273.10(c)(3)(iii), and it shall be budgeted either prospectively or 
retrospectively. Such income shall not effect more benefit months than 
the number of months in the period over which it is prorated.
    (iv) The State agency shall budget deductible expenses prorated over 
two or more months, except medical expenses, either prospectively or 
retrospectively, provided That such deductions are not budgeted over 
more months than they are intended to cover, and the total amount 
deducted does not exceed the total amount of the expenses. Medical 
expenses shall be budgeted prospectively. The State agency shall 
continue to allow deductions for expenses incurred even if billed on 
other than a monthly basis unless the household reports a change in the 
expense. The State agency may average the child support expense and 
budget it prospectively or retrospectively.
    (v) The State agency shall budget stable income regularly received 
as a

[[Page 701]]

single monthly payment for the month such income is intended to cover. 
The State agency shall budget deductions regularly billed as a single 
monthly payment for the month such deductions are intended to cover.
    (vi) The State agency may budget interest income using one of the 
following methods in paragraphs (f)(2)(vi) (A), (B), or (C) of this 
section. The State agency shall either establish categories of interest 
to be handled by each of the methods or shall offer each household the 
option of which method to budget the interest income.
    (A) Actual interest income received in the budget month.
    (B) Prorated interest income calculated by dividing the amount of 
interest anticipated during the certification period by the number of 
months in the certification period.
    (C) An averaged amount adjusted for anticipated changes.
    (vii) For a new household member described under paragraph 
(f)(1)(iii)(B) of this section, the State agency shall consider the new 
member's income and deductible expenses prospectively until the new 
member's first month living with the household becomes the budget month.
    (viii) The options provided under paragraph (j)(1)(vii) of this 
section may affect the calculation of income and deductions.
    (g) Determining eligibility and allotments in the beginning months. 
The State agency shall use the prospective budgeting procedures of this 
paragraph for determining the allotments and eligibility of households 
in the MRRB system during this first month, or first and second month of 
participation. The State agency shall not apply the procedures of this 
paragraph to the month(s) following the month of termination resulting 
from a temporary one-month change.
    (1) Determining eligibility during the beginning months. The State 
agency shall determine eligibility prospectively in the beginning 
month(s).
    (2) Calculating allotments during the beginning months. the State 
agency shall calculate allotments prospectively in the beginning 
month(s).
    (3) The first months of retrospective budgeting following the 
beginning months. The State agency shall begin to base issuances to the 
household on retrospective budgeting during the first month for which 
the State's system can use the month of application as a budget month. 
In a one-month system, the first month for which the issuance is based 
on retrospective budgeting shall be the second month of participation. 
In a two-month system, the first month for which the issuance is based 
on retrospective budgeting shall be the third month of participation. If 
the State agency had been averaging income or converting weekly or 
biweekly income to a monthly amount in the beginning months, it may 
begin using the household's actual budget month income when the 
household becomes subject to retrospective budgeting. For purposes of 
this paragraph, any income received in either or both of the beginning 
months from a source which no longer provides income to the household 
(terminated income), which was included in the household's prospective 
budget, shall be disregarded when the beginning month becomes the budget 
month.
    (h) The monthly report form--(1) General. (i) The State agency shall 
give the household a reasonable period of time after close of the budget 
month to submit the monthly reports.
    (ii) The State agency shall require each household in the MRRB 
system to report on household circumstances on a monthly basis as a 
condition of continuing eligibility.
    (iii) The State agency shall provide an individual or agency unit 
which a household may contact to receive prompt answers about the 
completion of the form. A telephone number (toll free for households 
outside the local calling area) which a household may use to obtain 
further information shall also be available.
    (iv) The State agency shall ensure that households are informed 
about the availability and amount of the standard utility allowances, if 
the State agency offers them.
    (2) Monthly report form. The State agency's monthly report form 
shall meet the following requirements:
    (i) Be written in clear, simple language;

[[Page 702]]

    (ii) Meet the bilingual requirements described in Sec. 272.4(b) of 
this chapter;
    (iii) Specify the date by which the agency must receive the form and 
the consequences of a late or incomplete form, including whether the 
State agency shall delay payment if the form is not received by the 
specified date;
    (iv) Specify the verification which the household must submit with 
the form, in accordance with Sec. 273.21(i);
    (v) Identify the individual or agency unit available to assist in 
completing the form:
    (vi) Include a statement to be signed by a member of the household, 
indicating his or her understanding that the provided information may 
result in changes in the level of benefits, including reduction and 
termination;
    (vii) Include, in prominent and boldface lettering, an 
understandable description of the Act's civil and criminal penalties for 
fraud.
    (viii) If the form requests Social Security numbers, include a 
statement of the State agency's authority to require Social Security 
numbers (SSN's) (including the statutory citation, the title of the 
statute, and the fact that providing SSN's is mandatory), the purpose of 
requiring SSN's, the routine uses for SSN's, and the effect of not 
providing SSN's. This statement may be on the form itself or included as 
an attachment to the form.
    (3) Reported information. The State agency may determine the 
information relevant to eligibility and benefit determination to be 
included on the monthly report form except that the State agency shall 
not require households to monthly report medical expenses. Medical 
expenses may be reported in accordance with Sec. 273.10(d)(4).
    (4) Combined form. If the State agency uses a combined monthly 
report for food stamps and AFDC, the State agency shall clearly indicate 
on the form that non-AFDC food stamp households need not provide AFDC-
only information.
    (i) Verification. Each month the household shall verify information 
for those items designated by the State agency. The State agency may 
designate that verification be submitted for any item that has changed 
or appears questionable. If the household voluntarily reports a change 
in its medical expenses, the State agency shall verify the change in 
accordance with Sec. 273.2(f)(8)(ii) before acting on it if the change 
would increase the household's allotment. In the case of a reported 
change that would decrease the household's allotment, or make the 
household ineligible, the State agency shall act on the change without 
requiring verification, though verification which is required by 
Sec. 273.2(f)(8)(i) shall be obtained prior to the household's 
recertification.
    (j) State agency action on reports--(1) Processing. Upon receiving a 
monthly report, the State agency shall:
    (i) Review the report to ensure accuracy and completeness.
    (ii) Consider the report incomplete only if:
    (A) It is not signed by the head of the household, an authorized 
representative or a responsible member of the household;
    (B) It is not accompanied by verification required by the State 
agency on the monthly report;
    (C) It omits information required by the State agency on the monthly 
report necessary either to determine the household's eligibility or to 
compute the household's level of food stamp benefits.
    (iii) Determine those items which will require additional 
verification, in accordance with paragraph (i) of this section.
    (iv) Contact the household directly, and take action as needed, to 
obtain further information on specific items. These items include:
    (A) The effect of a reported change in resources on a household's 
total resources; and
    (B) The effect of a reported change in household composition or loss 
of a job or source of earned income on the applicability of the work 
registration requirement.
    (v) Notify the household, in accordance with paragraph (j)(3)(ii) of 
this section, of the need to submit a report, correct an incomplete or 
inaccurate report, or submit the necessary verification within the 
extension period.

[[Page 703]]

    (vi) Determine the household's eligibility by considering all 
factors, including income, in accordance with paragraphs (e) or (g) of 
this section.
    (vii) Determine the household's level of benefits in accordance with 
Sec. 273.10(e) based on the household composition determined in 
accordance with paragraph (f)(1) of this section. For those household 
members the following (except as provided in paragraph (f)(2) of this 
section) income and deductions shall be considered:
    (A) Earned and unearned income received in the corresponding budget 
month, including income that has been averaged in accordance with 
paragraph (f) of this section. The earned income of an elementary or 
secondary school student excluded in accordance with Sec. 273.9(c)(7) 
shall be excluded until the budget month following the budget month in 
which the student turns 22. The State agency has the option of 
converting to a regular monthly amount the income that a household 
receives weekly or biweekly. If the State agency elects to convert 
weekly or biweekly income for MRRB households, it shall do so for all 
households in its MRRB caseload. The State agency may convert or average 
income in the beginning months and use actual earned or unearned income 
received in the budget month following the beginning months of 
participation.
    (B) The PA grant paid in the corresponding budget month or the PA 
grant to be paid in the issuance month. If the State agency elects to 
use the PA grant to be paid in the issuance month, the State agency 
shall ensure that:
    (1) Any additional or corrective payments are counted, either 
prospectively or retrospectively; and
    (2) the State agency shall disregard income received in the budget 
month from a terminated source which results in an increase in the PA 
grant, provided the household has reported the termination of the income 
either in the monthly report for the budget month or in some other 
manner which, as determined by the State agency, allows the State agency 
sufficient time to process the change and affect the allotment in the 
issuance month.

A State agency which elects to use the PA grant to be paid in the 
issuance month shall implement mass changes in accordance with the 
procedures at Sec. 273.12(e)(2).

    (C) Deductions as billed or averaged from the corresponding budget 
month, including those shelter costs billed less often than monthly 
which the household has chosen to average.
    (viii) Issue benefits in accordance with part 274 of this chapter 
and on the time schedule set forth in paragraph (k) of this section.
    (ix) Provide specific information on how the State agency calculated 
the benefit level if it has changed since the preceding month, either 
with the issuance or in a separate notification.
    (2) Notices. (i) All notices regarding changes in a household's 
benefits shall meet the definition of adequate notice as defined in 
Sec. 271.2.
    (ii) The State agency shall notify a household of any change from 
its prior benefit level and the basis for its determination. If the 
State agency reduces, suspends or terminates benefits, it shall send the 
notice so the household receives it no later than either the date the 
resulting benefits are to be received or in place of the benefits.
    (iii) The State agency shall notify a household, in accordance with 
paragraph (j)(3)(iii), if its monthly report is late or incomplete, or 
further information is needed.
    (3) Incomplete filing. (i) If a household fails to file a monthly 
report, or files an incomplete report, by the specified filing date, the 
State agency shall give the household at least ten more days, from the 
date the State agency mails the notice to file a complete monthly 
report.
    (ii) The State agency shall notify the household within five days of 
the filing date:
    (A) That the monthly report is either overdue or incomplete;
    (B) What the household must do to complete the form;
    (C) If any verification is missing and the lack of that verification 
will adversely affect the household's allotment;
    (D) That the Social Security number of a new member must be 
reported, if

[[Page 704]]

the household has reported a new member but not the new member's Social 
Security number;
    (E) What the extended filing date is;
    (F) That the State agency will assist the household in completing 
the report.
    (iii) When a State agency requires verification for the item listed 
and the household does not provide the verification, the State agency 
shall take the following actions:
    (A) If the household does not verify earned income, the State agency 
shall regard the household's report as incomplete, take action in 
accordance with paragraphs (j)(3)(i) and (j)(3)(ii) of this section and, 
if appropriate, terminate the household in accordance with paragraph (m) 
of this section.
    (B) If the household is using its actual utility costs to establish 
its shelter cost deduction in accordance with Sec. 273.9(d) and it does 
not verify a change in its actual utility expenses, the State agency 
shall not allow a deduction for such costs.
    (C) If a household fails to verify a change in reported medical 
expenses in accordance with Sec. 273.2(f)(8), and that change would 
increase the household's allotment, the State agency shall not make the 
change. The State agency shall act on reported changes without requiring 
verification if the changes would decrease the household's allotment, or 
make the household ineligible.
    (D) If the household does not verify other items for which 
verification is required, the State agency shall:
    (1) Act on the reported change if it would decrease benefits.
    (2) Not act on the reported change if it would increase benefits.
    (E) If the household does not report or verify changes in child 
support, the State agency shall not allow a child support deduction.
    (k) Issuance of benefits--(1) Timely issuance. (i) For an eligible 
household which has filed a complete monthly report by the scheduled 
filing date, the State agency shall provide an opportunity to 
participate within the month following the budget month in a one-month 
system, or within the second month following the budget month in a two-
month system.
    (ii) The State agency shall provide each household with an issuance 
cycle so that the household receives its benefits at about the same time 
each month and has an opportunity to participate before the end of each 
issuance month.
    (2) Delayed issuance. (i) If an eligible household files a complete 
monthly report during its extension period, the State agency shall 
provide it with an opportunity to participate no later than ten days 
after its normal issuance date.
    (ii) If an eligible household which has been terminated for failure 
to file a complete report files a complete report after its extended 
filing date, but before the end of the issuance month, the State agency 
may choose to reinstate the household by providing it with an 
opportunity to participate. If the household has requested a fair 
hearing on the basis that a complete monthly report was filed, the State 
agency shall reinstate the household if a completed monthly report is 
filed before the end of the issuance month.
    (iii) If an eligible household files a complete report after the 
issuance month, the State agency shall not provide the household with an 
opportunity to participate for that month.
    (l) Other reporting requirements. (1) Information reported on the 
monthly report. The monthly report shall be the sole reporting 
requirement for information required to be included in the monthly 
report. Changes in household circumstances not subject to monthly 
reporting shall be reported in accordance with Sec. 273.12.
    (2) Households excluded from monthly reporting. Households which are 
excluded from monthly reporting shall report changes in accordance with 
Sec. 273.12.
    (m) Termination. (1) The State agency shall terminate a household's 
food stamp participation if the household:
    (i) Is ineligible for food stamps, unless suspended in accordance 
with paragraph (n) of this section:
    (ii) Fails to file a complete report by the extended filing date; or
    (iii) Fails to comply with a nonfinancial eligibility requirement, 
such as registering for employment.
    (2) The State agency shall issue a notice to the household which:

[[Page 705]]

    (i) Complies with the requirements of Sec. 271.2 for adequate 
notice;
    (ii) Informs the household of the reason for its termination;
    (iii) If the State agency allows reinstatement under paragraph 
(k)(2)(ii), explains how the household may be reinstated;
    (iv) Informs the household of its rights to request a fair hearing 
and to receive continued benefits. If termination is for failure to 
submit a monthly report and the household states that a monthly report 
has been filed, the notice must advise the household that a completed 
monthly report must be filed prior to the end of the issuance month as a 
condition for continued receipt of benefits.
    (3) The State agency shall issue the notice to the household so that 
it receives the notice no later than the household's normal or extended 
issuance date.
    (n) Suspension. The State agency may suspend a household's issuance 
in accordance with this paragraph. If the State agency does not choose 
this option, it shall instead terminate households in accordance with 
paragraph (m) of this section.
    (1) The State agency may suspend a household's issuance for one 
month if the household becomes temporarily ineligible due to a periodic 
increase in recurring income or other change not expected to continue in 
the subsequent month. The State agency may on a Statewide basis either 
suspend the household's certification prospectively for the issuance 
month or retrospectively for the issuance month corresponding to the 
budget month in which the noncontinuing circumstance occurs.
    (2) The State agency shall continue to supply monthly reports to the 
household for one month.
    (3) If the suspended household again becomes eligible, the State 
agency shall issue benefits on the household's normal issuance date.
    (4) If the suspended household does not become eligible after one 
month, the State agency shall terminate the household.
    (o) If a household has been terminated or suspended based on an 
anticipated change in circumstances, the State agency shall not count 
any noncontinuing circumstances which caused the prospective 
ineligibility when calculating the household's benefits retrospectively 
in a subsequent month.
    (p) Fair hearings--(1) Entitlement. All households participating in 
a MRRB system shall be entitled to fair hearings in accordance with 
Sec. 273.15.
    (2) Continuation of benefits. (i) Any household which requests a 
fair hearing and does not waive continuation of benefits, and is 
otherwise eligible for continuation of benefits, shall have its benefits 
continued until the end of the certification period or the resolution of 
the fair hearing, whichever is first. If the State agency did not 
receive a monthly report from the household by the extended filing date 
and the household states that a monthly report was submitted, the 
household is entitled to continued benefits, provided That a completed 
report is submitted no later than the last day of the issuance month.
    (ii) The State agency shall provide continued benefits no later than 
five working days from the day it receives the household's request.
    (iii) A household whose benefits have been continued shall file 
montly reports until the end of the certification period. If the fair 
hearing is with regard to termination for nonreceipt of the monthly 
report by the State agency, a completed monthly report for the month in 
question shall be submitted by the household no later than the last day 
of the issuance month.
    (iv) During the fair hearing period the State agency shall adjust 
allotments to take into account reported changes, except for the 
factor(s) on which the fair hearing is based.
    (q) Recertification--(1) Timeliness. The State agency shall 
recertify an eligible household which timely reapplies and provides it 
with an opportunity to participate in the household's normal issuance 
cycle.
    (2) Retrospective Recertification. (i) The State agency shall 
recertify the household using retrospective information to determine the 
household's benefit level for the first month of the new certification 
period.
    (ii) If the State agency is operating a two-month MRRB system, the 
State

[[Page 706]]

agency may delay reflecting information from the recertification 
interview in the household's eligibility and benefit level until the 
second month of the new certification period.
    (iii) The State agency shall recertify households according to one 
of the three options set forth in paragraphs (q) (3), (4), or (5) of 
this section.
    (3) Option One: Recertification form. (i) The State agency shall 
provide each household with a recertification form to obtain all 
necessary information about the household's circumstances for the budget 
month.
    (ii) The State agency shall mail the form to the household, along 
with a notice of expiration, in place of the monthly report form. The 
State agency shall either: Mail the recertification form along with the 
notice of expiration; use a recertification form which contains a notice 
of expiration; or mail the recertification form and the notice of 
expiration separately, as long as the forms are mailed at the same time.
    (iii) The household shall submit the form to the State agency in 
accordance with paragraph (h)(1)(i) of this section.
    (4) Option Two: Monthly report and addendum. (i) The State agency 
shall provide each household with a notice of expiration and monthly 
report form and an addendum to obtain all additional information 
necessary for recertification.
    (ii) The State agency shall either: Mail the monthly report form 
along with the notice of expiration; use a monthly report form which 
contains a notice of expiration; or mail the monthly report form and the 
notice of expiration separately, as long as the forms are mailed at the 
same time.
    (iii) The household shall submit the monthly report to the State 
agency in accordance with paragraph (h)(1)(i) of this section.
    (iv) The State agency shall deliver the recertification addendum to 
the household along with the monthly report form or obtain the necessary 
information from the household at the interview.
    (v) The household shall submit the addendum to the State agency no 
later than the time of the interview.
    (5) Option Three: Signed Statement. (i) The State agency shall 
recertify households based on the monthly report and the interview.
    (ii) At the interview, the State agency shall obtain all of the 
information not provided in the monthly report which is necessary for 
recertification.
    (iii) The State agency shall ensure that it has on file a statement 
signed by the appropriate household member that the household has 
applied for recertification.
    (6) Interview. (1) The State agency shall conduct a complete 
interview with a household member or an authorized representative.
    (ii) The State agency shall schedule the interview at any time 
during the last month of the old certification period.
    (iii) If the State agency schedules the interview for a date on or 
before the normal filing due date of the monthly report, the State 
agency shall permit the household member and authorized representative 
to bring the recertification form or monthly report to the interview.
    (r) Procedures for households that change their reporting and 
budgeting status. The State agency shall use one of the following 
procedures for households subject to change in reporting/budgeting 
status.
    (1) Households which become subject to MRRB. The State agency may 
change the reporting/budgeting status of households which become subject 
to monthly reporting at any time following the change in household 
circumstances which results in the change in the household's reporting/
budgeting status, subject to the following conditions:
    (i) The State agency shall provide the household with information 
provided to MRRB households under paragraph (c) of this section. If the 
State agency elects to implement the change during the certification 
period, it may omit the oral explanation of MRRB required under 
paragraph (c)(1).
    (ii) The State agency shall not require the household to submit a 
monthly report during any month in which the household was subject to 
the change reporting requirements of Sec. 273.12.
    (2) Households which are no longer subject to MRRB. The agency shall 
use one

[[Page 707]]

of the following procedures to remove households from the MRRB system.
    (i) Procedures for households exempt from MRRB. For any household 
which becomes exempt from MRRB under paragraph (b) of this section, the 
State agency shall notify the household within 10 days of the date the 
State agency becomes aware of the change that the household has become 
exempt from monthly reporting and is no longer required to file any 
future monthly reports and has also become exempt from retrospective 
budgeting and when the change in budgeting will go into effect. The 
State agency shall begin determining the household's benefits 
prospectively no later than the first issuance month for which a 
household has not submitted a monthly report for the budget month.
    (ii) Other households moving from MRRB to change reporting and 
prospective budgeting. When a household is no longer subject to MRRB 
under a State agency's system, the State agency may begin determining 
the household's benefits prospectively in any month following the month 
the State agency becomes aware of the changed circumstances which 
necessitate the need to change the household's reporting/budgeting 
status. If the State agency elects to change the household's reporting/
budgeting status prior recertification it shall provide the household 
with a notice explaining the change in the month prior to the month the 
change is effective. If the State agency elects to change the 
household's status at recertification it shall advise the household at 
the recertification interview that its reporting/budgeting status is 
being changed.
    (iii) Households moving from MRRB to retrospective budgeting and 
change reporting. If a household's status necessitates changing it from 
a monthly reporter to a change reporter while continuing to be budgeted 
retrospectively, the State agency may change the household's status at 
any time. If the State agency elects to change the household 
immediately, the State agency shall provide the household with a notice 
that it is no longer subject to monthly reporting. The notice shall 
include information about the household's reporting requirements under 
Sec. 273.12.
    (s) Implementation of Regulatory Changes. The State agency shall 
implement changes in regulatory provisions for households subject to 
MRRB prospectively based on the effective date and implementation time 
frame published in the Federal Register. Rules are effective as of the 
same date for all households regardless of the budgeting system.
    (t) Monthly reporting requirements for households residing on 
reservations. The following procedures shall be used for households 
which reside on reservations and are required to submit monthly reports:
    (1) Definition of a reservation. For purposes of this section, the 
term ``reservation'' shall mean the geographically defined area or areas 
over which a tribal organization exercises governmental jurisdiction. 
The term ``tribal organization'' shall mean the recognized governing 
body of an Indian tribe (including the tribally recognized intertribal 
organization of such tribes), as well as any Indian tribe, band, or 
community holding a treaty with a State government.
    (2) Certification periods. Any household residing on a reservation 
that is required to submit a monthly report shall be certified for two 
(2) years.
    (i) A State agency may request a waiver from FCS to allow it to 
establish certification periods of less than two (2) years if it is able 
to justify the need for the shorter periods. Any request for a waiver 
shall include input from the affected Indian tribal organization(s) and 
quality control error rate information for the affected households.
    (ii) The State agency may opt to continue the two-year certification 
period for any household that moves off the reservation. If the State 
agency adopts this option and the household is still living off the 
reservation at the time it is subject to required recertification, the 
household shall be subject to the certification period requirements in 
Sec. 273.10(f)(4). If the State agency does not adopt this option, any 
household that moves off the reservation shall have its certification 
period shortened. A household continuing to be subject

[[Page 708]]

to monthly reporting shall not have its certification period shortened 
to less than six months. A household becoming subject to change 
reporting shall not have its certification period end any earlier than 
the month following the month in which the State agency determines that 
the certification period shall be shortened.
    (3) Benefit determination for missing reports. The State agency 
shall not delay, reduce, or suspend the allotment of a household that 
fails to submit a report by the issuance date.
    (4) Reinstatement. If a household is terminated for failing to 
submit a monthly report, the household shall be reinstated without being 
required to submit a new application if a monthly report is submitted no 
later than the last day of the month following the month the household 
was terminated.
    (5) Notices. (i) All notices regarding changes in a household's 
benefits shall meet the definition of adequate notice as defined in 
Sec. 271.2 of this chapter.
    (ii) If a household fails to file a monthly report by the specified 
filing date, the State agency shall notify the household within five 
days of the filing date:
    (A) That the monthly report is either overdue or incomplete;
    (B) What the household must do to complete the form;
    (C) If any verification is missing;
    (D) That the Social Security number of a new member must be 
reported, if the household has reported a new member but not the new 
member's Social Security number;
    (E) What the extended filing date is;
    (F) That the State agency will assist the household in completing 
the report; and
    (G) That the household's benefits will be issued based on the 
previous month's submitted report without regard to any changes in the 
household's circumstances if the missing report is not submitted.
    (iii) Simultaneously with the issuance, the State agency shall 
notify a household, if its report has not been received, that the 
benefits being provided are based on the previous month's submitted 
report and that this benefit does not reflect any changes in the 
household's circumstances. This notice shall also advise the household 
that, if a complete report is not filed timely, the household will be 
terminated.
    (iv) If the household is terminated, the State agency shall send the 
notice so the household receives it no later than the date benefits 
would have been received. This notice shall advise the household of its 
right to reinstatement if a complete monthly report is submitted by the 
end of the month following termination.
    (6) Supplements and claims. If the household submits the missing 
monthly report after the issuance date but in the issuance month, the 
State agency shall provide the household with a supplement, if 
warranted. If the household submits the missing monthly report after the 
issuance date or the State agency becomes aware of a change that would 
have decreased benefits in some other manner, the State agency shall 
file a claim for any benefits overissued.

[48 FR 54965, Dec. 8, 1983]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting 
Sec. 273.21, see the List of CFR Sections Affected in the Finding Aids 
section of this volume.


<R05>
Sec. 273.22   Optional workfare program.

    (a) General. This section contains rules which are to be followed in 
operating a Food Stamp Workfare Program. Under this program, nonexempt 
food stamp recipients may be required to perform work in a public 
service capacity as a condition of eligibility to receive the coupon 
allotment to which their household is normally entitled. The primary 
goal of workfare is to improve employability and enable individuals to 
move into regular employment.
    (b) Program administration. (1) A food stamp workfare program may be 
operated as part of a State's employment and training program, required 
in Sec. 273.7(f) or may be operated independent of such a program. If 
the workfare program is part of the State's employment and training 
program it shall be included as a component in the State's employment 
and training plan in accordance with the requirements of Sec. 273.7(c). 
If it is operated independent of the E&T program, the State must submit 
a workfare plan to FCS for its

[[Page 709]]

approval in accordance with the requirements of this section. For the 
purpose of this section, a political subdivision is any local 
government, including, but not limited to, any county, city, town or 
parish. A State agency may implement a workfare program statewide or in 
only some areas of the State. The areas of operation must be identified 
in the State workfare or employment and training plan.
    (2) Political subdivisions are encouraged, but not required, to 
submit their plans to FCS through their respective State agencies. At a 
minimum, however, plans shall be submitted to the State agencies 
concurrent with their submission to FCS. Workfare plans and subsequent 
amendments shall not be implemented prior to their approval by FCS.
    (3) When a State agency chooses to sponsor a workfare program by 
submitting a plan to FCS, it shall incorporate the approved plan into 
its State Plan of Operations. When a political subdivision chooses to 
sponsor a workfare program by submitting a plan to FCS, the State agency 
shall be responsible as a facilitator in the administration of the 
program by disbursing Federal funding and meeting the requirements 
identified in paragraph (d) of this section. Upon notification that FCS 
has approved a workfare plan submitted by a political subdivision in its 
State, the State agency shall append that political subdivision's 
workfare plan to its own State Plan of Operations.
    (4) The operating agency is that administrative organization which 
has been identified in the workfare plan as being responsible for 
establishing job sites, assigning eligible recipients to the job sites, 
and meeting the requirements of this section. The operating agency may 
be any public or private, nonprofit organization. The State agency or 
political subdivision which submitted the workfare plan shall be 
responsible for monitoring the operating agency's compliance with the 
requirements of this section or of the workfare plan. The Secretary may 
suspend or terminate some or all workfare program funding, or withdraw 
approval of the workfare program from the State agency or political 
subdivision which submitted the workfare plan upon finding that that 
State agency or political subdivision, or their respective operating 
agencies have failed to comply with the requirements of this section or 
of the workfare plan.
    (5) State agencies or other political subdivisions shall describe in 
detail in the plan how the political subdivision, working with the State 
agency and any other cooperating agencies that may be involved in the 
program, shall fulfill the provisions of this section. The plan shall 
include workload projections, staffing plans, interagency communication 
plans, and specific operational agreements developed by the agencies 
involved. The plan shall be a one-time submittal, with amendments 
submitted as needed to cover any changes in the workfare program as they 
occur.
    (6) State agencies or political subdivisions submitting a workfare 
plan shall submit with the plan an operating budget covering the period 
from the initiation of the workfare program's implementation schedule to 
the close of the Federal fiscal year. In addition, an estimate of the 
cost for one full year of operation shall be submitted together with the 
workfare plan. For subsequent fiscal years, the workfare program budget 
shall be included in the State agency's budget.
    (7) If workfare plans are submitted by more than one political 
subdivision, each representing the same population (such as a city 
within a county), the Department shall determine which political 
subdivision will have its plan approved. Under no circumstances shall a 
food stamp recipient be subject to more than one food stamp workfare 
program. If a political subdivision chooses to operate a workfare 
program and represents a population which is already, at least in part, 
subject to a food stamp workfare program administered by another 
political subdivision, it must establish in its workfare plan how food 
stamp recipients will not be subject to more than one food stamp 
workfare program.
    (c) Operating agency responsibilities. (1) The operating agency, as 
designated by the State agency or other political subdivision which 
submits a plan, shall be

[[Page 710]]

responsible for establishing and monitoring job sites, interviewing and 
assessing eligible recipients, assigning eligible recipients to 
appropriate job sites, monitoring participant compliance, making initial 
determinations of good cause for household noncompliance, and otherwise 
meeting the requirements of this section.
    (2) Establishment of job sites. Workfare job slots may only be 
located in public or private, nonprofit agencies. Contractual agreements 
must be established between the operating agency and organizations 
providing jobs which include but are not limited to designation of the 
slots available and designation of responsibility for provision of 
benefits, if any are required, to the workfare participant.
    (3) Notifying State agency of noncompliance. The operating agency 
shall notify the State agency of noncompliance by a household with a 
workfare obligation when it has determined that the household did not 
have good cause for the non-compliance. This notification shall occur 
within five days of such determination so that the State agency may make 
a final determination as provided in paragraph (d)(4) of this section.
    (4) Notifications. Notices shall be established to be used as 
follows: (i) For the State agency to notify the operating agency of 
workfare-eligible households. Included in this notice shall be the case 
name, case number, names of workfare-eligible household members, address 
of the household, certification period, and indication of any part-time 
work. If the State agency is calculating the hours of obligation, this 
shall also be included in this notice. If the operating agency is 
computing the hours to be worked, the monthly allotment shall be 
included.
    (ii) For operating agencies to notify the workfare participant of 
where and when the participant is to report, to whom the participant is 
to report, a brief description of duties for the particular placement, 
and the number of hours to be worked.
    (iii) For operating agencies to notify the State agency of failure 
by a household to meet its workfare obligation.
    (5) Recordkeeping requirements. (i) Files must be maintained which 
record activity by workfare participants. At a minimum, these records 
must contain job sites and hours assigned, hours completed, and 
communications with the State agency and job sites.
    (ii) Program records shall be maintained in an orderly fashion, for 
audit and review purposes, for a period of 3 years from the month of 
origin of each record. Fiscal records and accountable documents shall be 
retained for 3 years from the date of fiscal or administrative closure 
of the workfare program. Fiscal closure, as used in this paragraph, 
means that workfare program obligations for or against the Federal 
government have been liquidated. Administrative closure, as used in this 
paragraph, means that the operating agency or Federal government has 
determined and documented that no further action to liquidate the 
workfare program obligation is appropriate. Fiscal records and 
accountable records shall be kept in a manner which will permit 
verification of direct monthly reimbursements to recipients, in 
accordance with paragraph (f)(4) of this section.
    (6) Reporting requirements. The operating agency shall be 
responsible for providing information needed by the State agency to 
fulfill the reporting requirements stated in paragraph (d)(6) of this 
section.
    (7) Disclosure. The provisions of Sec. 272.1(c) restricting the use 
and disclosure of information obtained from food stamp households shall 
be applicable to the administration of the workfare program.
    (8) Grievance procedures. The operating agency may establish a 
system for handling complaints filed by workfare participants regarding 
their working conditions, perceived noncompliance by job sites with the 
provisions of this section, or any other area related to their workfare 
participation. This procedure need not handle complaints that can be 
pursued through a fair hearing nor may choosing not to use this 
procedure preclude a participant from requesting a fair hearing. If 
established, a description of this system shall be included in the 
workfare plan. Complaints which have not been resolved through this 
system and those against

[[Page 711]]

the operating agency shall be forwarded to the State agency and handled 
by the State agency according to the provisions of Sec. 271.6. Workfare 
participants shall be informed of the grievance procedure.
    (d) State agency responsibilities. (1) If a political subdivision 
chooses to operate a workfare program, the State agency shall cooperate 
with the political subdivision in developing a plan. This includes 
providing caseload and cost estimates, as well as being available for 
consultation on the design of the administrative structure and 
interagency communications for the program. The State agency may decide 
what its workfare policy shall be in three areas. They are the 
definition of reimbursable expenses, the definition of good cause, and 
the sanctioning of members of divided households (paragraphs (f)(4), 
(f)(5), and (f)(6)(ii) of this section, respectively). The State agency 
may either accept the policies contained in these paragraphs or 
determine its own policies, subject to the requirements of section 20 of 
the Food Stamp Act of 1977, as amended, and the approval of FCS. Until 
the Food and Consumer Service approves any alternate policies of the 
State agency, the provisions of paragraphs (f)(4), (f)(5), and 
(f)(6)(ii) of this section shall apply.
    (2) The State agency shall determine at certification or 
recertification which household members are eligible for the workfare 
program and inform the household representative of the nature of the 
program and of the penalties for noncompliance. If the State agency is 
not the operating agency, each member of a household who is subject to 
workfare under paragraph (e)(1) of this section shall be referred to the 
organization which is the operating agency. The information identified 
in paragraph (c)(4)(i) of this section shall be forwarded to the 
operating agency within 5 days after the date of household 
certification. Computation of hours to be worked may be delegated to the 
operating agency.
    (3) The State agency shall inform the household and the operating 
agency of the effect of any changes in a household's circumstances on 
the household's workfare obligation. This includes changes in benefit 
levels or workfare eligibility.
    (4) Upon notification by the operating agency that a participant has 
failed to comply with the workfare requirement without good cause, the 
State agency shall make a final determination as to whether or not such 
failure occurred and whether there was good cause for any such failure. 
If the State agency determines that the participant did not have good 
cause for noncompliance, a sanction shall be processed as provided in 
paragraph (f)(6) of this section. The State agency shall immediately 
inform the operating agency of the months during which the sanction 
shall apply.
    (5) The State agency shall maintain in each household's casefile all 
workfare-related forms used by the State agency in meeting the 
requirements of this section.
    (6) The State agency shall submit quarterly reports to FCS within 45 
days of the end of each quarter identifying for that quarter for that 
State:
    (i) The number of households referred to the operating agency as 
containing workfare-eligible recipients. A household shall be counted as 
referred each time it is referred to the operating agency.
    (ii) The number of households assigned to jobs each month by the 
operating agency.
    (iii) The number of individuals assigned to jobs each month by the 
operating agency.
    (iv) The total number of hours worked by participants.
    (v) The number of households against which sanctions were applied. A 
household being sanctioned over two quarters should only be reported as 
sanctioned for the earlier quarter.
    (7) The State agency may, at its option, assume responsibility for 
monitoring all workfare programs in its State to assure that there is 
compliance with this section and with the plan submitted and approved by 
FCS. Should the State agency assume this responsibility, it would act as 
agent for FCS which is ultimately responsible for ensuring such 
compliance. Should the State agency determine that noncompliance exists, 
it may withhold funding until compliance is achieved or

[[Page 712]]

FCS directs otherwise. FCS shall be notified prior to the withholding of 
funds of the circumstances leading to that action. At a minimum, the 
State agency shall perform onsite reviews of each workfare program once 
within six months of the program's implementation and then in accordance 
with the Management Evaluation review schedule for that program area.
    (e) Household responsibilities--(1) Persons subject to workfare. 
Household members subject to the work registration requirements as 
provided in Sec. 273.7(a) shall also be subject to the workfare 
requirements. In addition:
    (i) Those recipients exempt from work registration requirements due 
to being subject to the work incentive program (WIN) under title IV of 
the Social Security Act shall be subject to workfare if they are 
currently involved less than 20 hours a week in WIN. Those recipients 
involved 20 hours a week or more may be subject to workfare at the 
option of the political subdivision.
    (ii) Those recipients exempt from work registration requirements due 
to the application for or receipt of unemployment compensation shall be 
subject to workfare requirements; and
    (iii) Those recipients exempt from work registration requirements 
due to being a parent or other household member responsible for the care 
of a dependent child between the ages of six and twelve shall be subject 
to workfare requirements. If the child has its sixth birthday within a 
certification period, the individual responsible for the care of the 
child shall be subject to the workfare requirement as part of the next 
scheduled recertification process, unless the individual qualifies for 
another exemption.
    (2) Household obligation. The maximum total number of hours of work 
required of a household each month shall be determined by dividing the 
household's coupon allotment by the Federal or State minimum wage, 
whichever is higher. Fractions of hours of obligation may be rounded 
down. The household's hours of obligation for any given month may not be 
carried over into another month except when the household wishes to end 
a disqualification due to noncompliance with workfare in accordance with 
paragraph (f)(8) of this section.
    (f) Other program requirements--(1) Priority placements. The State 
agency or political subdivision submitting the plan shall indicate in 
the plan how it will determine priority for placement at job sites when 
the number of eligible participants is greater than the number of 
available positions at job sites.
    (2) Conditions of employment. (i) Recipients may be required to work 
up to, but not to exceed, 30 hours per week. In addition, the total 
number of hours worked by a recipient under workfare together with any 
other hours worked in any other compensated capacity, including hours of 
participation in a WIN training program, by such recipient on a regular 
or predictable part-time basis, shall not exceed thirty hours a week. 
With the recipient's consent, the hours to be worked may be scheduled in 
such a manner that more than thirty hours are worked in one week, as 
long as the total for that month does not exceed the weekly average of 
thirty hours a week.
    (ii) No participant shall be required to work more than eight hours 
on any given day, except that with the recipient's consent, more than 
eight hours may be scheduled.
    (iii) No participant shall be required to accept an offer of 
workfare employment if such employment fails to meet the criteria 
established in Sec. 273.7(i)(1) (iii) and (iv); and Sec. 273.7(i)(2) 
(i), (ii), (iv), and (v).
    (iv) If the workfare participant is unable to report for job 
scheduling, to appear for scheduled workfare employment, or to complete 
the entire workfare obligation due to compliance with Unemployment 
Insurance requirements, the additional work requirements established in 
Sec. 273.7(e) (1), (2), (3), or (4), or the job search requirements 
established in Sec. 273.7(f), such inability shall not be considered a 
refusal to accept workfare employment. If the workfare participant 
informs the operating agency of the time conflict, the operating agency 
shall, if possible, reschedule the missed activity. If such rescheduling 
cannot be completed before the end of the month, this shall not be cause 
for disqualification.

[[Page 713]]

    (v) The operating agency shall assure that all persons employed in 
workfare jobs receive job-related benefits at the same levels and to the 
same extent as similar non-workfare employees. These shall be benefits 
related to the actual work being performed, such as workers' 
compensation, and not to the employment by a particular agency, such as 
health benefits. Of those benefits required to be offered, any elective 
benefit which requires a cash contribution by the participant shall be 
optional at the discretion of the participant.
    (vi) All persons employed in workfare jobs shall be assured by the 
operating agency of working conditions provided other employees 
similarly employed.
    (vii) The provisions of section 2(a)(3) of the Service Contract Act 
of 1965 (Pub. L. 89-286), relating to health and safety conditions, 
shall apply to the workfare program.
    (viii) Operating agencies shall not provide work to a workfare 
participant which has the effect of replacing or preventing the 
employment of an individual not participating in the workfare program. 
Vacancies, due to hiring freezes, terminations, or lay-offs, shall not 
be filled by a workfare participant unless it can be demonstrated that 
such vacancies are a result of insufficient funds to sustain former 
staff levels.
    (ix) The workfare jobs shall in no way infringe upon the promotional 
opportunities which would otherwise be available to regular employees.
    (x) Workfare jobs shall not be related in any way to political or 
partisan activities.
    (xi) Workfare assignments should, to the greatest extent possible, 
take into consideration previous training, experience, and skills of a 
participant.
    (xii) The cost of workers' compensation or comparable protection 
provided to workfare participants by the State agency, political 
subdivision, or operating agency is a matchable cost under paragraph (g) 
of this section. Whether or not this coverage is provided, in no case is 
the Federal government the employer in these workfare programs (unless a 
Federal agency is the job site), and therefore, USDA does not assume 
liability for any injury to or death of a workfare participant while on 
the job.
    (xiii) The nondiscrimination requirement provided in Sec. 272.6(a) 
shall apply to all agencies involved in the workfare program.
    (3) Job search period. The operating agency may establish a job 
search period of up to 30 days following certification prior to making a 
workfare assignment during which the potential participant is expected 
to look for a job. This period may only be established at household 
certification, not at recertification. The potential participant would 
not be subject to any job search requirements beyond those required 
under Sec. 273.7 during this time.
    (4) Participant reimbursement. Participants shall be reimbursed by 
the operating agency for transportation and other costs that are 
reasonably necessary and directly related to participation in the 
program. These other costs may include the cost of child care, or the 
cost of personal safety items or equipment required for performance of 
work if these items are also purchased by regular employees. These other 
costs shall not include the cost of meals away from home. No participant 
cost which has been reimbursed under a workfare program operated under 
Title IV of the Social Security Act or any other workfare program shall 
be reimbursed under the food stamp workfare program. Only reimbursement 
of participant costs which are up to but not in excess of $25 per month 
for any participant will be subject to Federal cost sharing as provided 
in paragraph (g)(1) of this section. Child care costs which are 
reimbursed may not be claimed as expenses and used in calculating the 
child care deduction for determining household benefits. Pursuant to 
paragraph (d)(1) of this section, a State agency may decide what its 
reimbursement policy shall be.
    (5) Good cause. For the purpose of this section, unless a State 
agency has determined its good cause policy pursuant to paragraph (d)(1) 
of this section, good cause shall include:
    (i) Circumstances beyond a household member's control, such as, but 
not limited to: Illness; the illness or incapacitation of another 
household member requiring the presence of the workfare participant; a 
household emergency; or

[[Page 714]]

the lack of transportation when transportation is not provided by the 
operating agency;
    (ii) Necessity for a parent or other responsible household member to 
care for a child between the age of six and 12 because adequate child 
care is not otherwise available;
    (iii) Becoming exempt from the workfare eligibility requirements 
under the terms established in paragraph (e)(1) of this section.
    (iv) Household moving out of the area of the workfare project.
    (v) Instances where cost of transportation and other costs have 
exceeded $25 per month and are not being reimbursed by the operating 
agency.
    (6) Failure to comply. (i) Where a workfare participant has been 
determined by the State agency to have failed or refused without good 
cause to comply with the requirements of this section, the entire 
household shall be ineligible to participate. Such ineligibility shall 
continue until either the household meets the provisions of paragraph 
(f)(8) of this section or for 2 consecutive months, whichever occurs 
earlier. Within 10 days after receiving notification of the household's 
failure to comply with the requirements of this section, the State 
agency shall, if it determines that there is not good cause for the 
noncompliance, provide the household with a notice of adverse action, as 
specified in Sec. 273.13. Such notification shall contain the proposed 
period of disqualification and shall specify the terms and conditions on 
which disqualification can be ended. Information shall also be included 
with the notification on the procedures and requirements contained in 
paragraph (f)(8) of this section. The disqualification period shall 
begin with the first month following the expiration of the adverse 
notice period, or following a fair hearing decision if a fair hearing is 
requested, in which the household would normally have received benefits. 
A household member shall not be required to perform work at a job site 
when the household is no longer receiving benefits unless the household 
has chosen to meet the conditions for ending disqualification specified 
in paragraph (f)(8) of this section. Until the disqualification is 
actually invoked, the household, if otherwise eligible, will continue to 
have a workfare obligation.
    (ii) Should a household have two or more consecutive months of 
noncompliance while being certified for food stamps, the total 
corresponding months of sanction shall be a cumulative total; that is, 
two months of noncompliance shall entail a four-month sanction. Should a 
household which has been determined to be noncompliant without good 
cause split into more than one household, the sanction shall follow all 
the members of the household at the time of the noncompliance. None of 
those household members shall be eligible to participate in the food 
stamp program for the length of the sanction beginning at the point when 
the sanction can be placed against any one of them.
    (iii) If a sanctioned household member joins another food stamp 
household, that household's eligibility and benefit level shall be 
determined as follows:
    (A) Income, resources, and deductible expenses. The income and 
resources of the household member(s) disqualified for noncompliance with 
workfare shall count in their entirety, and the entire household's 
allowable earned income standard, medical, dependent care and excess 
shelter deductions shall apply to the remaining household members.
    (B) Eligibility and benefit level. An individual disqualified for 
noncompliance with workfare shall not be included when determining the 
household's size for the purpose of assigning a benefit level to the 
household or of comparing the household's monthly income with income 
eligibility standards. The State agency shall ensure that no household's 
coupon allotment is increased as a result of the disqualification of one 
or more household member for workfare noncompliance.
    (7) Fair hearings. Each household has a right to a fair hearing to 
appeal a denial or termination of benefits due to a State agency 
determination of failure to comply with the requirements of this 
section. The fair hearing requirements provided in Sec. 273.15 shall 
apply. If a fair hearing is scheduled, the operating agency shall be 
available to participate in the hearing. The State

[[Page 715]]

agency shall provide the operating agency sufficient advance notice to 
permit the attendance of an operating agency representative.
    (8) Ending disqualification. Following the end of the 2-month 
disqualification period for noncompliance with the workfare provisions 
of this section, a household may resume participation in the program if 
it applies again and is determined eligible. Eligibility may be 
reestablished during a disqualification period and the household shall 
(if it makes application and is determined otherwise eligible) be 
permitted to resume participation if the member who failed to comply or 
any other workfare-eligible member of the household satisfies all 
outstanding workfare obligations. A workfare position shall be made 
available for a household which wishes to end disqualification in this 
manner.
    (9) Benefit overissuances. If a benefit overissuance is discovered 
for a month or months in which a participant has already performed a 
workfare or work component requirement, the State agency shall follow 
claim recovery procedures specified below.
    (i) If the person who performed the work is still subject to a work 
obligation, the State shall determine how may extra hours were worked 
because of the improper benefit. The participant should be credited that 
number of hours toward future work obligations.
    (ii) If a workfare or work component requirement does not continue, 
the State agency shall determine whether the overissuance was the result 
of an intentional program violation, an inadvertent household error, or 
a State agency error. For an intentional program violation a claim 
should be established for the entire amount of the overissuance. If the 
overissuance was caused by an inadvertent household error or State 
agency error, the State agency shall determine whether the number of 
hours worked in workfare are more than the number which could have been 
assigned had the proper benefit level been used in calculating the 
number of hours to work. A claim shall be established for the amount of 
the overissuance not ``worked off,'' if any. If the hours worked equal 
the amount of hours calculated by dividing the overissuance by the 
minimum wage, no claim shall be established. No credit for future work 
requirements shall be given.
    (g) Federal financial participation--(1) Administrative costs. Fifty 
percent of all administrative costs incurred by State agencies or 
political subdivisions in operating a workfare program shall be funded 
by the Federal government. Such costs include those related to recipient 
participation in workfare, up to $25 per month for any participant, as 
indicated in paragraph (f)(4) of this section. Such costs shall not 
include the costs of equipment, capital expenditures, tools or materials 
used in connection with the work performed by workfare participants, the 
costs of supervising workfare participants, the costs of reimbursing 
participants for meals away from home, or reimbursed expenses in excess 
of $25 per month for any participant.
    (2) Funding mechanism. The State agencies shall have responsibility 
for disbursing Federal funds used for the workfare program through the 
State agencies' Letters of Credit. The State agency shall also assure 
that records are being maintained which support the financial claims 
being made to FCS. This will be for all programs, regardless of who 
submits the plan. Mechanisms for funding local political subdivisions 
which have submitted plans must be established by the State agencies.
    (3) Fiscal recordkeeping and reporting requirements. Workfare-
related costs shall be identified by the State agency on the Financial 
Status Report (Form SF-269) as a separate column. All financial records, 
supporting documents, statistical records, negotiated contracts, and all 
other records pertinent to workfare program funds shall be maintained in 
accordance with Sec. 277.12.
    (4) Sharing workfare savings--(i) Entitlement. A political 
subdivision is entitled to share in the benefit reductions which occur 
when a workfare participant begins employment while participating in 
workfare for the first time, or within thirty days of ending the first 
participation in workfare.
    (A) To begin employment means to appear at the place of employment 
and to begin working.

[[Page 716]]

    (B) First participation in workfare means performing work for the 
first time in a particular workfare program. The only break in 
participation which shall not end first participation shall be due to 
the participant's taking a job which does not affect the household's 
allotment by an entire month's wages and which is followed by a return 
to workfare.
    (ii) Calculating the benefit reductions. The political subdivision 
shall calculate benefit reductions from each workfare participant's 
employment as follows.
    (A) Unless the political subdivision knows otherwise, it shall 
presume that the benefit reduction equals the difference between the 
last allotment issued before the participant began the new employment 
and the first allotment which reflects a full months wages, earned 
income deduction, and dependent care deduction attributable to the new 
job.
    (B) If the political subdivision knows of other changes besides the 
new job, which affect the household's allotment after the new job began, 
the political subdivision shall obtain the first allotment affected by 
an entire month's wages from the new job. The political subdivision 
shall then recalculate the allotment to account for the wages, earned 
income deduction, and dependent care deduction attributable to the new 
job. In recalculating the allotment the political subdivision shall also 
replace any AFDC grant received after the new job with the one received 
in the last month before the new job began. The difference between the 
first allotment that accounts for the new job and the recalculated 
allotment shall be the benefit reduction.
    (C) The political subdivision's share of the benefit reduction is 
three times this difference, divided by two.
    (D) If, during these procedures, an error is discovered in the last 
allotment issued before the new employment began, that allotment shall 
be corrected before the savings are calculated.
    (iii) Accounting. The reimbursement from workfare shall be reported 
and paid as follows:
    (A) The political subdivision shall report its enhanced 
reimbursement to the State agency in accordance with paragraph (g)(3) of 
this section.
    (B) The Food and Consumer Service shall reimburse the political 
subdivision in accordance with paragraph (g)(2) of this section.
    (C) The political subdivision shall, upon request, make available 
for review sufficient documentation to justify the amount of the 
enhanced reimbursement.
    (D) The Food and Consumer Service shall reimburse only the political 
subdivision's reimbursed administrative costs in the fiscal year in 
which the workfare participant began new employment and which are 
acceptable according to paragraph (g)(1) of this section.
    (h) Coordination with other workfare-type programs. State agencies 
and political subdivisions may operate workfare programs as provided in 
this section jointly with a workfare program operated under Title IV of 
the Social Security Act to the extent that provisions and protections of 
the statute are maintained or with other workfare programs operated by 
the subdivision to the extent that the provisions and protections of 
this section are maintained. Statutory provisions include, but are not 
limited to, eligible recipients as provided in paragraph (e)(1) of this 
section, maximum hours of work per week as provided in paragraph 
(f)(2)(i) of this section and the penalty for noncompliance as provided 
in paragraph (f)(6)(i) of this section. When a household receives 
benefits from more than one program with a workfare requirement and the 
household is determined to have a food stamp workfare obligation, the 
food stamp obligation may be combined with the obligation from the other 
program. However, this may be done only to the extent that eligible food 
stamp workfare participants are not required to work more than 30 hours 
a week in accordance with paragraph (f)(2)(i) of this section. Any 
intent to coordinate programs should be described in the plan. Waivers 
of provisions in this section, for the purpose of operating workfare 
jointly with local general assistance workfare-type programs may be 
requested and provided in accordance with Sec. 272.3(c). Statutory 
provisions, shall not be waived.

[[Page 717]]

    (i) Voluntary workfare program. State agencies and political 
subdivisions may operate workfare programs whereby participation by food 
stamp recipients is voluntary. In such a program, the penalty for 
failure to comply as provided in paragraph (f)(6) of this section shall 
not apply for noncompliance. The amount of hours to be worked will be 
negotiated between the household and the operating agency, though not to 
exceed the limits provided under paragraph (f)(2) of this section. In 
addition, all protections provided under paragraph (f)(2) of this 
section shall continue to apply. Those State agencies and political 
subdivisions choosing to operate such a program shall indicate in their 
workfare plan how their staffing will adapt to anticipated and 
unanticipated levels of participation. The Department will not approve 
plans which do not show that the benefits of the workfare program, in 
terms of hours worked by participants and reduced food stamp allotments 
due to successful job attainment, are expected to exceed the costs of 
such a program. In addition, if the Department finds that an approved 
voluntary program does not meet this criteria, the Department reserves 
the right to withdraw approval.

[Amdt. 217, 47 FR 44697, Oct. 8, 1982, as amended by Amdt. 240, 48 FR 
1173, Jan. 11, 1983; Amdt. 269, 51 FR 10793, Mar. 28, 1986, 53 FR 31646, 
Aug. 19, 1988; Amdt. 356, 59 FR 29713, June 9, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 273.23  Simplified application and standardized benefit projects.

    (a) General. This subpart establishes rules under which Simplified 
Application and Standardized Benefit Projects shall operate. State 
agencies and political subdivisions chosen as project operators may 
designate households containing members receiving AFDC, SSI, or Medicaid 
benefits as project eligible. Project eligible households shall have 
their food stamp eligibility determined using simplified application 
procedures. Food stamp eligibility shall be determined using information 
contained in their AFDC, or Medicaid application, or, in the case of 
SSI, on the State Data Exchange (SDX) tape, and any appropriate 
addendum. Project-eligible households shall be considered categorically 
food stamp resource eligible based on their eligibility for these other 
programs and shall be required to meet food stamp income eligibility 
standards. However, income definitions appropriate to the AFDC, SSI or 
Medicaid programs shall be used instead of food stamp income definitions 
in determining eligibility. In addition, such households shall, as a 
condition of program eligibility, meet and/or fulfill all food stamp 
nonfinancial eligibility requirements. (Project-eligible households 
defined as categorically eligible in Sec. 273.2 (j) and (k) of these 
regulations are not required to meet the income eligibility standards.) 
To further simplify program administration, benefits provided to such 
households may be standardized by category of assistance and household 
size.
    (b) Program administration. (1) Simplified application and 
standardized benefit procedures are applicable in five States and five 
political subdivisions. For the purpose of this section, a political 
subdivision is a project area as defined in Sec. 271.2 of these 
regulations.
    (2) State agencies and political subdivisions seeking to operate a 
Simplified Application and Standardized Benefit Project shall submit 
Work Plans to FCS in accordance with the requirements of this section.
    (3) FCS shall evaluate Work Plans according to the criteria set 
forth in the Simplified Application/Standardized Benefit Notice of 
Intent.
    (4) Political subdivisions shall submit their Work Plans to FCS 
through their respective State agencies for review and approval.
    (5) A State agency selected by FCS to operate a Simplified 
Application and Standardized Benefit Project shall include the Work Plan 
in its State Plan of Operations. A political subdivision chosen to 
operate a Simplified Application and Standardized Benefit Project shall 
assure that the responsible State agency include that political 
subdivision's project Work Plan in its own State Plan of Operations. The 
Work Plan shall be updated, as needed, to reflect changes in the benefit 
methodology, subject to prior FCS approval.
    (c) Contents of the work plan. The Work Plan submitted by each 
applicant

[[Page 718]]

shall contain the following information:
    (1) Background information on the proposed site's characteristics, 
current operating procedures, and a general description of the proposed 
procedures;
    (2) A description of the proposed project design, including the 
benefit methodology, households which will be project eligible, 
operational procedures, and the need for waivers;
    (3) An implementation and monitoring plan describing tasks, staffing 
and a timetable for implementation;
    (4) An estimate of project impacts including implementation costs 
and, on an annual basis, operating costs, administrative costs, error 
reduction, and benefit changes; and
    (5) A statement signed by the State official with authority to 
commit the State or political subdivisions to the project's operation.
    (d) Project-eligible households. Each operating agency shall decide 
which of the following categories of household shall be eligible to 
participate in the project.
    (1) Households all of whose members receive AFDC benefits under part 
A of title IV of the Social Security Act;
    (2) Households all of whose members receive SSI benefits under title 
XVI of the Social Security Act;
    (3) Households all of whose members receive Medicaid benefits under 
title XIX of the Social Security Act;
    (4) Households each of whose members receive one or more of the 
following: AFDC, SSI, or Medicaid benefits (multiple-benefit 
households); and
    (5) Households only some of whose members receive AFDC, SSI, and/or 
Medicaid benefits (mixed households).
    (e) Determining Food Stamp Program eligibility. Under the Simplified 
Application and Standardized Benefit Project, project eligible 
households shall have their food stamp eligibility determined using the 
following criteria.
    (1) Certain households, at the operating agency's option, which 
contain members receiving AFDC, SSI, or Medicaid benefits, shall be 
designated project eligible and need not make separate application for 
food stamp benefits. Once such households indicate in writing a desire 
to receive food stamps, their eligibility will be determined based on 
information contained in their application for AFDC or Medicaid benefits 
or, in the case of SSI, on the State Data Exchange (SDX) tape. AFDC or 
Medicaid applications may need to be modified, or be subject to an 
addendum in order to accommodate any additional information required by 
the operating agency.
    (2) The income definitions and resource requirements prescribed 
under Sec. 273.9 (b) and (c) and Sec. 273.8 are inapplicable to project-
eligible households. Project-eligible households which have met the 
resource requirements of the AFDC, SSI, and/or Medicaid programs shall 
be considered to have satisfied the food stamp resource requirements. 
Gross income less any allowed exclusions, as defined by the appropriate 
categorical aid program, shall be used to determine food stamp income 
eligibility (unless the project household is categorically income 
eligible as defined in Sec. 273.2 (j) and (k)) and benefit levels. 
Deemed income, as defined under AFDC, SSI or Medicaid rules, shall be 
excluded to the extent that households with such income are part of the 
food stamp household providing the deemed income.
    (3) Project-eligible households which are not categorically income 
eligible shall meet the gross and net income standards prescribed in 
Sec. 273.9(a). Net income shall be determined by subtracting from gross 
income either actual or standardized deduction amounts. If standardized 
deduction amounts are used, they may be initially determined using 
recent historical data on deductions claimed by such households. Such 
deductions must be updated, as necessary, on at least an annual basis. 
Such deductions shall include:
    (i) The current standard deduction for all households;
    (ii) An excess shelter deduction and a dependent care deduction for 
households not containing an elderly or disabled member;
    (iii) A dependent care deduction, an uncapped excess shelter 
deduction and a medical deduction for households containing a qualified 
elderly or disabled member; and

[[Page 719]]

    (iv) A standardized or actual earned income deduction for households 
containing members with earned income.
    (4) All non-financial food stamp eligibility requirements shall be 
applicable to project-eligible households.
    (f) Benefit levels. (1) In establishing benefits for project 
eligible households, either the appropriate State standard of need 
(maximum aid payment) or gross income as determined for the appropriate 
categorical aid program plus the value of any monetary categorical 
benefits received, if any, may be used as the gross income amount. If 
mixed households are designated project eligible, procedures shall be 
developed to include as household income the income of those household 
members not receiving categorical aid.
    (2) If allotments are standardized, the average allotment for each 
category of household, by household size, shall be no less than average 
allotments would have been were the project not in operation.
    (3) Benefit methodologies shall be constructed to ensure that 
benefits received by households having higher than average allotments 
under normal program rules are not significantly reduced as a result of 
standardization.
    (4) Benefit methodologies shall be structured to ensure that 
decreases in household benefits are not reduced by more than $10 or 20%, 
whichever is less.
    (5) The methodology to be used in developing benefit levels shall be 
determined by the operating agency but shall be subject to FCS approval.
    (6) With FCS approval, operating agencies may develop an alternate 
methodology for standardizing allotments/deductions for specific sizes 
and categories of households where such size and category is so small as 
to make the use of average deductions and/or allotments impractical.
    (7) FCS may require operating agencies to revise their standardized 
allotments during the course of the project to reflect changes in items 
such as household characteristics, the Thrifty Food Plan, deduction 
amounts, the benefit reduction rate, or benefit levels in AFDC or SSI. 
Such changes will be documented by revising the Work Plan amendment to 
the State Plan of Operations.
    (g) Household notification. All certified project-eligible 
households residing in the selected project sites shall be provided with 
a notice, prior to project commencement, informing them of the revised 
procedures and household requirements under the project. If household 
allotments are to be standardized, the notice shall also provide 
specific information on the value of the newly computed benefit and the 
formula used to calculate the benefit. The notice shall meet the 
requirements of a notice of adverse action as set forth in 
Sec. 273.13(a)(2).
    (h) Application processing procedures. (1) The operating agency 
shall allow project-eligible households to indicate in writing their 
desire to receive food stamps. Such households shall be notified in 
writing, at the time such indication is made, that information contained 
in their AFDC, SSI, or Medicaid application will be the basis of their 
food stamp eligibility determination. If mixed households are included 
in the project-eligible universe, the project operator shall develop a 
procedure to collect the necessary information on household members not 
receiving categorical aid.
    (2) The operating agency may use simplified application and 
standardized benefit procedures only for those households containing at 
least one member certified to receive either AFDC, SSI, or Medicaid 
benefits. If simplified procedures are to be used, the State agency 
shall make all eligibility determinations for households jointly 
applying for food stamps and AFDC, SSI, or Medicaid benefits within the 
30-day food stamp processing period. If a household's eligibility for 
AFDC, SSI, or Medicaid cannot be established within the 30-day period, 
normal food stamp application, certification, and benefit determination 
procedures shall be used and benefits shall be issued within 30 days if 
the household is eligible. Households which are jointly applying for 
AFDC, SSI, or Medicaid, and which qualify for expedited service, shall 
be certified for food stamps using procedures prescribed at 
Sec. 273.2(i). However, if the State agency can process the application 
of an expedited service household for categorical assistance within the 
expedited period

[[Page 720]]

prescribed at Sec. 273.2(i), it may use simplified application and 
standardized benefit procedures to certify the household for food stamp 
benefits.
    (i) Regulatory requirements. (1) All Food Stamp Program regulations 
shall remain in effect unless they are expressly altered by the 
provisions of this section or the provisions contained within the 
approved SA/SB Work Plan.
    (2) Certification periods for mixed households. At the option of the 
operating agency, mixed households may be assigned certification periods 
of up to one year. Such households, if circumstances warrant, may be 
required to attend a face-to-face interview on a schedule which would 
conform to certification periods normally assigned such households as 
specified in Sec. 273.10(f). At the time of the interview, the household 
shall be required to complete a modified application and provide 
additional information in accordance with Sec. 273.2(f). If the 
household fails to comply with the interview review requirement or if 
information obtained indicates a revision in household eligibility or 
benefits, action will be taken in accordance withSec. 273.13, Notice of 
Adverse Action.
    (j) Quality control. (1) Project eligible households selected for 
quality control review shall be reviewed by the State agency using 
special procedures, based on project requirements, which have been 
developed by the State agency and approved by FCS.
    (2) The error rate(s) determined using the special quality control 
review procedures shall be included when determining the State agency's 
overall error rate.
    (k) Funding. Operating agencies shall be reimbursed for project 
costs at the rates prescribed in Sec. 277.4.
    (l) Evaluation. Each project site shall conduct a self-evaluation of 
the project's impact on benefits, administrative costs and 
participation. Such evaluation shall be conducted within three months of 
project implementation. The results of the self-evaluation shall be sent 
to FCS within six months of project implementation. The impact of the 
project on project-eligible households' error rates shall be reported on 
an annual basis in accordance with Sec. 273.23(m).
    (m) Reporting requirements. Operating agencies shall be required to 
prepare and submit to FCS an annual report on the error rate 
attributable to project-eligible households. The timing of such reports 
shall coincide with the due date for the annual quality control report 
prescribed in Sec. 275.21(d).
    (n) State agency monitoring. Monitoring shall be undertaken to 
ensure compliance with these regulations and the Work Plan submitted to 
and approved by FCS. Project monitoring shall be conducted in accordance 
with the appropriate sections of part 275, Performance Reporting System, 
of these regulations. At a minimum, onsite reviews of the Simplified 
Application and Standardized Benefit Project shall be conducted once 
within six months of the project's implementation and then in accordance 
with the Management Evaluation review schedule for the project area.
    (o) Termination. (1) FCS may terminate project operations for any 
reason and at any time on 60 days written notice to the administering 
State agency or political subdivision. State or local agencies may also 
choose to terminate their participation with 60 days written notice to 
FCS. In either such event, operating agencies shall be given sufficient 
time to return to normal operations in an orderly fashion.
    (2) If termination occurs, FCS may select another site for project 
operations. Such selection shall be based on either previously received 
project proposals or proposals received under a new solicitation.

[53 FR 26224, July 12, 1988]


<R03>
PART 274--ISSUANCE AND USE OF COUPONS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
274.1  State agency issuance responsibility.
274.2  Providing benefits to participants.
274.3  Issuance systems.
274.4  Reconciliation and reporting.
274.5  Authorized representatives.
274.6  Replacement issuances to households.
274.7  Coupon management.
274.8  Responsibilities of coupon issuers, and bulk storage and claims 
          collection points.
274.9  Closeout of a coupon issuer.

[[Page 721]]

274.10  Use of identification cards and redemption of coupons by 
          eligible households.
274.11  Issuance and inventory record retention, and forms security.
274.12  Electronic Benefit Transfer issuance system approval standards.

    Authority: 7 U.S.C. 2011-2032.

    Source: 54 FR 7004, Feb. 15, 1989, unless otherwise noted.

    Editorial Note: OMB control numbers relating to this part 274 are 
contained in Sec. 271.8.


<R05>
Sec. 274.1  State agency issuance responsibility.

    (a) Basic issuance requirements. State agencies shall establish 
issuance and accountability systems which ensure that only certified 
eligible households receive benefits; that coupons are accepted, stored, 
and protected after delivery to receiving points within the State; that 
Program benefits are timely distributed in the correct amounts; and that 
coupon issuance and reconciliation activities are properly conducted and 
accurately reported to FCS.
    (b) Contracting or delegating issuance responsibilities. State 
agencies may assign to others such as banks, savings and loan 
associations, the Postal Service, community action and migrant service 
agencies, and other commercial businesses, the responsibility for the 
issuance and storage of food coupons. State agencies may permit 
contractors to subcontract assigned issuance responsibilities.
    (1) Any assignment of issuance functions shall clearly delineate the 
responsibilities of both parties. The State agency remains responsible, 
regardless of any agreements to the contrary, for ensuring that assigned 
duties are carried out in accordance with these regulations. In 
addition, the State agency is strictly liable to FCS for all losses of 
coupons, even if those losses are the result of the performance of 
issuance, security, or accountability duties by another party.
    (2) All issuance contracts shall follow procurement standards set 
forth in part 277.
    (3) The State agency shall not assign the issuance of coupons to any 
retail food firm unless the State agency provides evidence that such an 
arrangement is needed to maintain or increase the efficient and 
effective operation of the Program, as described below.
    (i) Coupons may be issued inside or within a retail food store, if 
the issuance is performed by a bank, credit union or other financial 
organization independent of the retail food store.
    (ii) Coupons may be issued on-site by a retail food store under the 
following conditions:
    (A) The State agency adequately documents that unless the retail 
food store is permitted to issue coupons on-site there will be a 
hardship, not just an inconvenience, to recipients. The State agency 
shall contract directly with the retail food firm and shall provide 
oversight to such entity; or
    (B) In the absence of the hardship documentation, a retail food firm 
itself may perform issuance as a subcontractor to a bank, credit union 
or other independent financial organization, with strict oversight by 
the financial organization.
    (4) The State agency may contract with the U.S. Postal Service for 
the issuance of benefits. The Department and the Postal Service have 
signed an agreement which governs benefit issuance by the Postal 
Service. A State agency's contract with the Postal Service does not 
exempt the State agency from the requirement that it comply with these 
regulations. However, State agencies may negotiate contracts with the 
Postal Service on all terms and conditions as long as such provisions do 
not conflict with these regulations.
    (5) In project areas or parts of project areas where FCS has 
required a Photographic identification (Photo ID) system to be used, the 
State agency shall include in any contract or agreement with an issuing 
agent a provision establishing the agent's liability to the State agency 
for the face value of coupons issued in any authorization document 
transaction where the authorization document is found to have been 
stolen or otherwise not received by the household certified as eligible, 
if the cashier has not fulfilled the requirements contained in 
Sec. 274.10. This same provision shall apply to issuance contracts in 
project areas or parts of project areas where FCS has granted a waiver 
or waivers of any provision(s) of

[[Page 722]]

the Photo ID requirements based on a determination that State agency 
alternatives will not compromise the security of the ID system.
    (c) State monitoring of coupon issuers. The State agency's 
accountability system shall include procedures for monitoring coupon 
issuers to assure that the day-to-day operations of all coupon issuers 
comply with these regulations, to identify and correct deficiencies, and 
to report violations of the Act or regulations to FCS.
    (1) The State agency shall conduct an onsite review of each coupon 
issuer and bulk storage point at least once every three years. All 
offices or units of a coupon issuer are subject to this review 
requirement. The State agency shall base each review on the specific 
activities performed by each coupon issuer or bulk storage point. A 
physical inventory of coupons shall be taken at each location and that 
count compared with perpetual inventory records and the monthly reports 
of the coupon issuer or bulk storage point. This review may be conducted 
at branch sites as well as the main offices of each issuer and bulk 
storage point that operates in more than one office. Except in unusual 
circumstances, the Postal Inspection Service will conduct onsite reviews 
of Postal Service issuance operations.
    (2) This review requirement may be fulfilled in part or in total by 
the performance reporting review system, part 275. The State agency may 
delegate this review responsibility to another unit of the State 
government or contract with an outside firm with expertise in auditing 
and accounting. State agencies may use the results of reviews of coupon 
issuers by independent audit or accounting firms as long as the food 
coupon issuance operations of the coupon issuer are included in the 
review.
    (d) Changes. The State agency shall inform FCS whenever a project 
area, issuance point, reconciliation point, replacement point, bulk 
storage reporting point or coupon shipment receiving point is created, 
relocated, or terminated. The State agency shall report the change at 
least 30 days prior to the effective date of the change. Initial 
notification may be made by telephone but the State agency shall confirm 
the information in writing as soon as possible.
    (e) Advance planning documentation. State agencies must comply with 
the procurement requirements of part 277 for the acquisition, design, 
development, or installation of automated data processing (ADP) 
equipment. With certain exceptions detailed in part 277, State agencies 
must receive prior approval for the design and acquisition of ADP 
systems through submission of advance planning documents (APD's).


<R05>
Sec. 274.2  Providing benefits to participants.

    (a) General. Each State agency is responsible for the timely and 
accurate issuance of benefits to certified eligible households in 
accordance with these regulations. Those households comprised of elderly 
or disabled members which have difficulty reaching issuance offices, and 
households which do not reside in a permanent dwelling or of a fixed 
mailing address shall be given assistance in obtaining their regular 
monthly benefits. State agencies shall assist these households by 
arranging for the mail issuance of coupons to them, by assisting them in 
finding authorized representatives who can act on their behalf, or by 
using other appropriate means. Requirements to assure timely and 
accurate issuance of benefits to eligible households in rural areas are 
described in paragraph (g) of this section.
    (b) Availability of benefits. All newly-certified households, except 
those that are given expedited service, shall be given an opportunity to 
participate no later than 30 calendar days following the date the 
application was filed. An opportunity to participate consists of 
providing households with coupons or authorization documents and having 
issuance facilities open and available for the households to obtain 
their benefits. State agencies must mail authorization documents or 
coupons in time to assure that the documents can be transacted, or the 
coupons spent after they are received but before the 30-day standard 
expires. A household has not been provided an opportunity to participate 
within the 30-day standard if the authorization document or benefits

[[Page 723]]

are mailed on the 29th or 30th day. Neither has an opportunity to 
participate been provided if the authorization document is mailed on the 
28th day but no issuance facility is open on the 30th day. For 
households entitled to expedited service, the State agency shall make 
benefits available to the household not later than the fifth calendar 
day following the date of application. Whatever system a State agency 
uses to ensure meeting this delivery standard shall be designed to allow 
a reasonable opportunity for redemption of ATPs no later than the fifth 
calendar day following the date of application.
    (c) Combined allotments. For those households which are to receive a 
combined allotment, the State agency shall provide the benefits for both 
months as an aggregate (combined) allotment, or as two separate 
allotments, with the same validity period, made available at the same 
time, in accordance with the timeframes specified in Sec. 273.2 of this 
chapter.
    (d) Ongoing households. All households shall be placed on an 
issuance schedule so that they receive their benefits on or about the 
same date each month. The date upon which a household receives its 
initial allotment after certification need not be the date that the 
household must receive its subsequent allotments.
    (1) State agencies that use direct-mail issuance shall stagger 
issuance over at least 10 days of the issuance month, and may stagger 
issuance over the entire issuance month. State agencies using a method 
other than direct-mail issuance may stagger issuance throughout the 
month, or for a shorter period. When staggering benefit delivery, 
however, State agencies shall not allow more than 40 days to elapse 
between the issuance of any two allotments provided to a household 
participating longer than two consecutive, complete months. Regardless 
of the issuance schedule used, the State agency shall adhere to the 
reporting requirements specified in Sec. 274.4.
    (2) Upon the request of the tribal organization that exercises 
governmental jurisdiction over a reservation, the State agency shall 
stagger the issuance of benefits for eligible households located on 
reservations for at least 15 days each month.
    (3) When a participating household is transferred from one issuance 
system or procedure to another issuance system or procedure, the State 
agency shall not permit more than 40 days to elapse between the last 
issuance under the previous system or procedure, and the first issuance 
under the new system or procedure. The 40-day requirement does not apply 
to instances in which actions by recipients, such as failure to submit a 
monthly report, disrupt benefits. Transfers include, but are not limited 
to, households being moved into or out of a staggered issuance 
procedure, households on a fluctuating schedule within a staggered 
system, and households being moved from a direct-mail issuance system to 
an authorization document system. If the State agency determines that 
more than 40 days may elapse between issuances, the State agency shall 
divide the new issuance into two parts, with one part being issued 
within the 40-day period, and the second part, or supplemental issuance, 
being issued on the household's established issuance date in the new 
system or procedure. The supplemental issuance cannot provide the 
household more benefits than the household is entitled to receive.
    (4) Notwithstanding the above provisions, in months in which 
benefits have been suspended under the provisions of Sec. 271.7, State 
agencies may stagger issuance to certified households following the end 
of the suspension. In such situations, State agencies may, at their 
option, stagger issuance from the date issuance resumes through the end 
of the month or over a five-day period following the resumption of 
issuance, even if this results in benefits being issued after the end of 
the month in which the suspension occurred.
    (e) Issuance services. State agencies are responsible for 
determining the location and hours of operation of issuance services. In 
doing so, State agencies shall ensure that the issuance schedules set 
forth in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section are met. In addition, 
issuance authorization documents, such as ATP cards, should be valid 
only in the geographic area within the State that is encompassed by

[[Page 724]]

the reconciliation system through which the issuance will be processed; 
however, the validity area may be extended within the State at the State 
agency's option. State agencies may also restrict the validity of these 
documents to smaller areas or particular issuance sites with minimal 
practicable inconvenience to affected households.
    (f) Issuance of coupons to households. The State agency shall issue 
coupon books in accordance with a table for coupon-book issuance 
provided by FCS, except as provided in paragraphs (e)(1), (e)(2), and 
(e)(3) of this section. The State agency shall issue the coupon books in 
consecutive serial number order whenever possible, starting with the 
lowest serial number in each coupon book denomination. The household 
member whose name appears on the ID card shall sign the coupon books; if 
more than one name appears, any named member may sign the books.
    (1) The State agency may deviate from the table if the specified 
coupon books are unavailable.
    (2) Exceptions from the table are authorized for blind and visually-
handicapped participants who request that all coupons be of one 
denomination. Recipients who have no fixed address (homeless), and 
residents of shelters for battered women and children, as defined in 
Sec. 271.2, and which are not authorized by FCS to redeem through 
wholesalers, may request that all or part of their coupons be of the $1 
denomination. State agencies are authorized to grant this request when 
feasible.
    (3) If a household is eligible for an allotment of $1, $3, or $5, 
the State agency shall adjust those allotments to $2, $4, or $6, 
respectively.
    (g) Issuance in rural areas. State agencies shall use direct-mail 
issuance in any rural areas where the State agency determines that 
recipients face substantial difficulties in obtaining transportation in 
order to obtain their food stamp benefits by methods other than direct-
mail issuance. Exceptions shall be made for households which have 
exceeded the two allowable reported losses within a six-month period and 
replacements set forth in Sec. 274.6 (b) and (g), and direct-mail 
issuance is not required in those localities where the direct mail loss 
rates exceed, or are likely to exceed, standards set by the Secretary at 
Sec. 276.2(b) of this chapter. The State agency shall:
    (1) Submit an attachment to the State Plan of Operation 
(Sec. 272.2(d)(1)(xi) of this chapter) which describes the State's 
exemption from this requirement, because the State agency uses direct-
mail issuance throughout the State, or
    (2) Submit an attachment to the State Plan of Operation 
(Sec. 272.2(d)(1)(xi) of this chapter) which describes:
    (i) The areas designated by the State agency as rural;
    (ii) The rural areas where direct-mail issuance will not be used 
because:
    (A) Recipients do not face substantial difficulties in obtaining 
transportation to obtain their benefits, and/or;
    (B) Direct-mail issuance losses exceed the loss tolerance levels, or 
there is evidence which indicates that direct-mail issuance, if used, 
would produce losses which would exceed the loss tolerance levels 
established under Sec. 276.2(b)(4) of this chapter.
    (iii) The State agency's criteria for designating an area as rural. 
Such criteria may include, but are not limited to: the use of the Bureau 
of the Census definition; the distances that recipients may need to 
travel to reach an issuance office; or, other criteria described by the 
State agency.
    (iv) The State agency's minimum criteria for determining that 
recipients in an area designated as rural do not face substantial 
difficulties in obtaining transportation to obtain their benefits.
    (v) The State agency's schedule for introducing direct-mail issuance 
into any rural areas requiring direct-mail issuance because of 
substantial transportation problems.

[54 FR 7004, Feb. 15, 1989, as amended at 54 FR 51351, Dec. 15, 1989; 60 
FR 20182, Apr. 25, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 274.3  Issuance systems.

    (a) System classification. State agencies may issue benefits to 
households through any of the following systems:
    (1) An authorization document system that uses a document produced 
for each month's issuance. The intermediary document, such as an ATP, 
may be distributed on a monthly

[[Page 725]]

basis to each household and surrendered by the household to the coupon 
issuer, or provided monthly to issuers with either single household 
authorizations or multiple household authorizations on each (such as a 
computer-generated listing). For reconciliation and identification 
purposes, the authorization document shall contain the following:
    (i) Serial number;
    (ii) Case name and address;
    (iii) Case number;
    (iv) Allotment amount;
    (v) Benefit month or expiration date;
    (vi) Name of issuing project area; and,
    (vii) Space for signature of household member. An additional space 
for an authorized representative may be included.
    (2) A direct access system that directly accesses a master issuance 
file at the time that benefits are issued to households. This system 
shall use manual card access or an automated access to the master 
issuance file. Systems of this type include the manual Household 
Issuance Record (HIR) card system and on-line issuance terminals.
    (3) A mail issuance system that directly delivers coupons through 
the mail to households.
    (4) An on-line Electronic Benefit Transfer system in which food 
stamp benefits are stored in a central computer database and 
electronically accessed by households at the point-of-sale via reusable 
plastic cards.
    (b) Other systems. A State agency may develop an issuance system 
which cannot be readily categorized into one of the systems described in 
paragraph (a) of this section. FCS shall prescribe the reporting and 
reconciliation requirements which apply to that system.
    (c) Alternative benefit issuance system. (1) If the Secretary, in 
consultation with the Office of the Inspector General, determines that 
Program integrity would be improved by changing the issuance system of a 
State, the Secretary shall require the State agency to issue or deliver 
coupons using another method. The alternative method may be one of the 
methods described in paragraph (a) of this section, or the Secretary may 
require a State agency to issue, in lieu of coupons, reusable documents 
to be used as part of an automated data processing and information 
retrieval system and to be presented by, and returned to, recipients at 
retail food firms for the purpose of purchasing food. The determination 
of which alternative to use will be made by FCS after consultation with 
the State agency. The cost of conversion will be shared by the 
Department and the State agency in accordance with the cost accounting 
provision of part 277.
    (2) The cost of documents or systems which may be required as a 
result of a permanent alternative issuance system pursuant to this 
section shall not be imposed upon retail food firms participating in the 
Program.
    (d) System requirements. (1) The State agency shall establish a 
master issuance file which is a composite of the issuance records of all 
certified food stamp households. The State agency shall establish the 
master issuance file in a manner compatible with its system used for 
maintaining case record information and shall separate the information 
on the master issuance file into active and inactive case file 
categories. The master issuance file shall contain all the information 
needed to identify certified households, issue household benefits, 
record the participation activity for each household and supply all 
information necessary to fulfill the reporting requirements prescribed 
in Sec. 274.4.
    (i) The master issuance file shall be kept current and accurate. It 
shall be updated and maintained through the use of documents such as 
notices of change and controls for expired certification periods.
    (ii) Before entering a household's data on the master issuance file, 
the State agency shall review the master issuance file to ensure that 
the household is not currently participating in, or disqualified from, 
the Program. If an authorization document is issued under the expedited 
service requirements of Secs. 273.2(i) and 274.2(b), the State agency 
shall complete as much of the master issuance file review as possible 
prior to issuing the authorization document. Any uncompleted reviews 
shall be completed after issuance and appropriate

[[Page 726]]

corrective action shall be taken to recover overissuance.
    (2) State agencies should divide issuance responsibilities between 
at least two persons to prevent any single individual from having 
complete control over the authorization of issuances and the issuances 
themselves. Responsibilities to be divided include maintenance of 
inventory records, assembly of benefits and preparation of envelopes for 
mailing. If issuance functions in an office are handled by one person, a 
second-party review shall be made to verify coupon inventory, the 
reconciliation of the mail log, and the number of mailings prepared.
    (3) State agencies shall establish controls to prevent a household 
from concurrently receiving benefits through more than one issuance 
system.
    (4) State agencies shall clearly identify issuances in their 
accountability systems as initial, supplemental, replacement, or 
restored benefits.
    (5) State agencies shall establish a Statewide record of replacement 
issuances granted to households to prevent a household from receiving 
more than two countable replacement issuances as defined in 
Sec. 274.6(b) in a six-month period.
    (6) State agencies which issue benefits by mail shall, at a minimum, 
use first class mail and sturdy nonforwarding envelopes or packages to 
send benefits to households.
    (e) Validity periods. (1) State agencies shall establish validity 
periods for issuances made in both authorization document and direct 
access systems. A validity period is the time frame during which a 
household may obtain benefits by transacting an authorization document, 
or receiving the benefits directly at an issuance point. Generally, the 
validity period coincides with the issuance month or the period of 
intended use, which may or may not be a calendar month. However, in 
instances in which authorization documents are distributed, or benefits 
become available for ongoing households late in the issuance month, the 
State agency shall extend the validity or availability period for either 
twenty (20) additional days, or until the end of the following issuance 
month, at the State agency's option. The State agency may also choose 
one of two dates which will initiate this extension of the validity or 
availability period. The State agency may choose to extend the period 
for authorization documents distributed or for benefits made available, 
on or after the 20th day of the issuance month or after the 15th day of 
the issuance month. Whichever date the State agency chooses to initiate 
the required extension, the State agency must use the date consistently 
for all extensions in this category. A household which does not transact 
its authorization document, or obtain the benefits directly from an 
issuance point during the issuance's validity period, shall lose its 
entitlement to the benefits, and the State agency shall not issue 
benefits to such a household for such a period.
    (2) State agencies experiencing excessive issuance losses may 
develop systems that have authorization documents that expire in shorter 
time frames than those set forth in paragraph (e) of this section. 
However, such systems shall include methods that allow households the 
opportunity to obtain their benefits for the full validity period of a 
month's issuance.

[54 FR 7004, Feb. 15, 1989, as amended at 54 FR 51351, Dec. 15, 1989; 57 
FR 11249, Apr. 1, 1992; 60 FR 20183, Apr. 25, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 274.4  Reconciliation and reporting.

    (a) Reconciliation. State agencies shall account for all issuance 
through a reconciliation process. The manner in which this is done 
varies depending on the type of issuance system being used.
    (1) Described below are the required reconciliation procedures for 
each type of system.
    (i) In all issuance systems coupon issuers shall reconcile their 
issuances daily using daily tally sheets, cashiers' daily reports, tapes 
or printouts.
    (ii) In systems where a record-for-issuance is used, all issuances 
authorized for the month shall be merged into one record-for-issuance at 
the end of each month. All issuances made during the month shall then be 
posted to the record-for-issuance. The record-for-issuance shall then be 
compared with the master issuance file. Findings from this comparison 
shall be reported on the Form FCS-46 as prescribed in paragraph (b)(2) 
of this section.

[[Page 727]]

    (iii) In systems where no record-for-issuance is used, issuances 
made during each month shall be reconciled to the master issuance file. 
Findings from this reconciliation shall be reported on the Form FCS-46 
as prescribed in paragraph (b)(2) of this section.
    (iv) In addition to the reconciliation activity prescribed in the 
paragraphs (a)(1)(i), (a)(1)(ii) and (a)(1)(iii) of this section, the 
following steps shall be followed in authorization document systems:
    (A) The State agency shall determine and verify the transacted value 
of authorized coupon issuances.
    (B) Any batches of transacted authorization documents that do not 
reconcile shall be maintained intact by the State agency until the 
discrepancy is resolved with the coupon issuer and/or a review of the 
case files.
    (C) The State agency shall compare all transacted authorization 
documents with the record-for-issuance or master issuance file as 
appropriate. Any documents that do not match with the record-for-
issuance or master issuance file shall be identified and reported as 
required in paragraph (b)(2) of this section.
    (b) Required reports. The State agency shall review and submit the 
following reports to FCS on a monthly basis:
    (1) Form FCS-250, Food Coupon Accountability Report.
    (i) This report, executed monthly by coupon issuers and bulk storage 
points, shall be signed by the coupon issuer or appropriate official, 
certifying that the information is true and correct to the best of that 
person's knowledge and belief.
    (ii) Coupon issuers and bulk storage points shall submit supporting 
documentation to the State agency which will allow verification of the 
monthly report. At a minimum, such documentation shall include documents 
supporting coupon shipments, transfers, issuances, and destruction.
    (iii) For those State agencies which use an authorization document 
issuance system, coupon issuers shall submit transacted authorization 
documents batched according to each day's activity in accordance with a 
schedule prescribed by the State agency, but not less often than 
monthly.
    (iv) All mail issuance activity, including the value of mail 
issuance replacements, shall be reported. Original allotments (first 
benefits issued for a particular month to an ongoing household) 
subsequently recovered by the issuance office during the current month 
shall be returned to inventory and noted on the mail issuance log. When 
the original allotment is returned to inventory and the replacement 
issuance is issued during the current month (month in which original 
benefits were issued), the ``replacement'' shall not be reported.
    (v) The Form FCS-250 shall be reviewed by the State agency for 
accuracy, completeness and reasonableness. The State agency shall attest 
to the accuracy of these reports and shall submit the reports so they 
will be received by FCS by the 45th day after the report month. Any 
revisions to the Form FCS-250 for a given month shall be submitted to 
FCS within 105 days after the end of the report month.
    (vi) FCS shall review each form, submitted through the State agency, 
for completeness, accuracy and reasonableness and shall reconcile 
inventory with shipping records, and shall review State agency 
verification of coupon issuer and bulk storage point monthly reports. 
FCS may supplement the above reviews by unannounced spot checks of 
inventory levels and coupon security arrangements at coupon issuers and 
at bulk storage points.
    (2) Form FCS-46, Issuance Reconciliation Report, shall be submitted 
by each State agency operating an issuance system. The report shall be 
prepared at the level of the State agency where the actual 
reconciliation of the record-for-issuance and master issuance file 
occurs.
    (i) The State agency shall identify and report the number and value 
of all issuances which do not reconcile with the record-for-issuance 
and/or master issuance file. All unreconciled issuances shall be 
identified as specified on this reporting document.
    (ii) The report shall be received by FCS no later than 90 days 
following the end of the report month.
    (3) Form FCS-259, Food Stamp Mail Issuance Report.

[[Page 728]]

    (i) Form FCS-259 reports shall be submitted by State agencies for 
each unit using a mail issuance system as specified in the Mail Issuance 
Loss Reporting Plan required in Sec. 272.2(d)(1)(iv). The State agency 
shall submit the Form FCS-259 reports so that they are received in FCS 
by the 45th day following the end of each quarter.
    (ii) The State agency shall verify the issuance by a comparison with 
issuance on the appropriate coupon issuer's Form FCS-250.
    (4) Form FCS-388, State Coupon Issuance and Participation Estimates.
    (i) State agencies shall telephone or transmit by computer the Form 
FCS-388 data and mail the reports to the FCS regional office no later 
than the 19th day of each month. When the 19th falls on a weekend or 
holiday, the Form FCS-388 data shall be reported by telephone or 
transmitted by computer and mailed on the first work day after the 19th. 
The Form FCS-388 report shall be signed by the person responsible for 
completing the report or a designated State agency official.
    (ii) The Form FCS-388 report shall provide Statewide estimated or 
actual totals of issuance and participation for the current and previous 
month, and actual or final participation totals for the second preceding 
month. In addition to the participation totals for the second preceding 
months of January and July, provided on the March and September reports, 
non-assistance (NA) and public assistance (PA) household and person 
participation breakdowns shall be provided. As an attachment to the 
March and September Form FCS-388 reports, State agencies shall provide 
project area breakdowns of the coupon issuance and NA/PA household and 
person participation data for the second preceding months of January and 
July.
    (iii) State agencies shall submit any proposed changes in their 
estimation procedures to be used in determining the Form FCS-388 data to 
the FCS regional office for review and comment. FCS shall monitor the 
accuracy of the estimated dollar value of coupons issued as reported on 
the Form FCS-388 against the Statewide total dollar value of coupons as 
reported by the issuance agents on the Form FCS-250, Food Stamp 
Accountability Report, for the corresponding month. FCS shall monitor 
the accuracy of the Statewide estimated number of households and persons 
participating as reported on the Form FCS-388 report against the 
Statewide actual total participation as reported on succeeding Form FCS-
388 reports and against the semiannual project area participation totals 
attached to the March and September Form FCS-388 reports. The FCS 
accuracy standards for the issuance and participation estimates are that 
estimates for the current month be within (+) or (-) four (4) percent of 
actual levels, and the estimates for the previous month be within (+) or 
(-) two (2) percent of actual levels. State agencies shall explain any 
unusual circumstances that cause coupon issuance and/or participation 
data to not meet these accuracy standards. If a State agency fails to 
meet these accuracy standards, FCS shall notify the State agency and 
assist the State agency in revising its estimating procedures to improve 
its reporting.
    (iv) A participating household is one that is certified and has 
been, or will be, issued benefits (whether or not the benefits are 
used), and households that have met the eligibility requirements, but 
will receive zero benefits.

[54 FR 7004, Feb. 15, 1989, as amended at 54 FR 51351, Dec. 15, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 274.5  Authorized representatives.

    (a) Household representation. The head of household, spouse or any 
other responsible member of the household may designate an authorized 
representative to act on behalf of the household in making application 
for the Program, in obtaining benefits and/or in using benefits at 
authorized firms. Rules pertaining to designating authorized 
representatives to apply for the Program on behalf of a household are in 
Sec. 273.1(f). Specified below are the rules pertaining to the use of 
authorized representatives to obtain household benefits or to use 
household benefits:
    (1) An authorized representative may be designated to obtain 
coupons. The designation shall be made at the time the application is 
completed and any authorized representative shall be named on the ID 
card. The authorlzed

[[Page 729]]

representative for coupon issuance may be the same individual designated 
to make application for the household or may be another individual. Even 
if a household member is able to make application and obtain benefits, 
the household should be encouraged to name an authorized representative 
for obtaining coupons in case of illness or other circumstances which 
might result in an inability to obtain benefits.
    (2) The State agency shall ensure that authorized representatives 
are properly designated. The name of the authorized representative shall 
be contained in the household's case file. Limits shall not be placed on 
the number of households an authorized representative may represent. In 
the event employers, such as those that employ migrant or seasonal 
farmworkers, are designated as authorized representatives or that a 
single authorized representative has access to a large number of 
authorization documents or coupons, the State agency should exercise 
caution to assure that each household has freely requested the 
assistance of the authorized representative, the household's 
circumstances are correctly represented, the household is receiving the 
correct amount of benefits and that the authorized representative is 
properly using the benefits.
    (3) State agency employees who are involved in the eligibility 
determination and/or issuance processes and employees of authorized food 
firms and meal services that are authorized to accept food coupons shall 
not be authorized representatives unless the State agency determines 
that no other representative is available.
    (4) An individual disqualified for fraud shall not be an authorized 
representative during the period of disqualification unless the 
individual is the only adult in the household and the State agency is 
unable to arrange for another authorized representative. State agencies 
shall separately determine whether these individuals are needed to apply 
on behalf of the household, to obtain coupons for the household, and to 
use the household's coupons to purchase food.
    (5) In the event the only adult living with a household is 
classified as a nonhousehold member as defined in Sec. 273.1(b), that 
individual may be the authorized representative for the minor household 
members.
    (6) Drug or alcohol treatment centers shall receive and spend the 
food stamp benefits for food prepared by and/or served to the residents 
of the center who are participating in the Food Stamp Program.
    (7) The head of a group living arrangement which acts as the 
authorized representative for the residents, may either receive and 
spend the residents' benefits for food prepared by and/or served to each 
eligible resident or allow each resident to spend all or any portion of 
the benefits on his/her own behalf. Meal providers for the homeless may 
not be authorized representatives, as specified in Sec. 273.1(f)(4)(iv).
    (b) Emergency representative for obtaining benefits. The State 
agency shall develop a system by which a household may designate an 
emergency authorized representative to obtain the household's benefits 
for a particular month. At a minimum, the method developed by the State 
agency shall require that a household member whose signature is on the 
household's ID card sign a designation authorizing the particular 
emergency representative to receive the household's benefits and 
attesting to the validity of the emergency representative's signature 
which must also be on the designation. Households shall not be required 
to travel to a food stamp office to execute the designation. Additional 
provisions pertaining to the use of identification cards by emergency 
authorized representatives are contained in Sec. 274.10(c).
    (c) Authorized representatives for using benefits. A household may 
enlist any household member or a nonmember to use its ID card and 
benefits to purchase food or meals for the household. However, 
individuals disqualified from the Program because of their commission of 
an intentional Program violation may only act as authorized 
representatives for households if no other representative can be found.
    (d) Disqualification. An authorized or emergency representative may 
be disqualified from representing a household in the Program for up to 
one year

[[Page 730]]

if the State agency has obtained evidence that the representative has 
misrepresented a household's circumstances and has knowingly provided 
false information pertaining to the household, or has made improper use 
of coupons. The State agency shall send written notification to the 
affected household and to the representative 30 days prior to the date 
of disqualification. The notification shall include the proposed action, 
the reason for the proposed action, the household's right to request a 
fair hearing, the telephone number of the office, and, if possible, the 
name of the person to contact for additional information. This provision 
is not applicable in the case of drug and alcohol treatment centers and 
to the heads of group living arrangements which act as authorized 
representatives for their residents. However, drug and alcohol treatment 
centers and the heads of group living arrangements that act as 
authorized representatives for their residents, and which intentionally 
misrepresent households' circumstances, may be prosecuted under 
applicable State fraud statutes for their acts.


<R05>
Sec. 274.6  Replacement issuances to households.

    (a) Providing replacement issuance. (1) Subject to the restrictions 
in paragraph (b) of this section, State agencies shall provide 
replacement issuances to a household when the household reports that:
    (i) Its authorization document was not received in the mail or was 
stolen from the mail, was stolen after receipt, was destroyed in a 
household misfortune, or was improperly manufactured or mutilated;
    (ii) Its coupons were not received in the mail, were stolen from the 
mail, were destroyed in a household misfortune, or were improperly 
manufactured or mutilated;
    (iii) Food purchased with food stamps was destroyed in a household 
misfortune; or
    (iv) It received a partial coupon allotment.
    (2) State agencies shall not provide replacement issuances to 
households when coupons are lost, stolen or misplaced after receipt, 
authorization documents are lost or misplaced after receipt, when 
authorization documents or coupons are totally destroyed after receipt 
in other than a disaster or misfortune, or when coupons sent by 
registered or certified mail are signed for by anyone residing with or 
visiting the household. In addition, replacement issuances shall not be 
made if the household or its authorized representative has not signed 
and returned the household statement required in paragraph (c) of this 
section, where applicable.
    (3) Where FCS has issued a disaster declaration and the household is 
eligible for disaster food stamp benefits under the provisions of part 
280, the household shall not receive both the disaster allotment and a 
replacement allotment for a misfortune.
    (4) In order for a replacement to be considered non-countable, the 
replacement must not result in a loss to the Program.
    (b) Replacement restrictions. (1) Replacement issuances shall be 
provided only if a household timely reports a loss orally or in writing, 
and provides a statement of nonreceipt if the original authorization 
document or allotment has not been returned to the State agency at the 
time of the request for replacement. The report will be considered 
timely if it is made to the State agency within 10 days of the date an 
authorization document is stolen from the household, or an authorization 
document, coupons, or food purchased with food stamps is destroyed in a 
household misfortune. In mail issuance (ATPs or coupons), the report 
must be made within the period of intended use, unless the original 
issuance was made after the 20th of the month, in which case the period 
of intended use is 20 days from original issuance, or the last day of 
the next month (State agency option).
    (2) The number of replacement issuances which a household may 
receive shall be limited as follows:
    (i) State agencies shall limit replacement issuances to a total of 
two countable replacements in six months for authorization documents or 
coupons not received in, or stolen from, the mail; authorization 
documents stolen after receipt; and partial coupon allotments.

[[Page 731]]

However, no limit shall be put on the number of replacements of partial 
allotments if the partial allotments were due to State agency error. 
Separate limits shall not apply for each of these types of loss.
    (ii) State agencies shall limit replacement issuances per household 
to two countable replacements in six months for authorization documents 
or coupons reported as destroyed in a household misfortune. This limit 
is in addition to the limit in paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section.
    (iii) No limit on the number of replacements shall be placed on the 
replacement of authorization documents or coupons which were improperly 
manufactured or mutilated or food purchased with food stamp benefits 
which was destroyed in a household misfortune.
    (iv) The replacement issuance shall not be considered a countable 
replacement if:
    (A) The original or replacement issuance is returned or otherwise 
recouped by the State agency;
    (B) The original authorization document is not transacted;
    (C) The replacement authorization document is not transacted; or
    (D) The replacement is being issued due to a State agency issuance 
error.
    (3) Except for households certified under 7 CFR part 280, 
replacement issuances shall be provided in the amount of the loss to the 
household, up to a maximum of one month's allotment, unless the issuance 
includes restored benefits which shall be replaced up to their full 
value.
    (c) Household statement of nonreceipt. (1) Prior to issuing a 
replacement, the State agency shall obtain from a member of the 
household a signed statement attesting to the household's loss. This 
statement shall not be required if the reason for the replacement is 
that the original authorization document or coupons were improperly 
manufactured or mutilated, or if the original issuance has already been 
returned. The required statement may be mailed to the State agency if 
the household member is unable to come into the office because of age, 
handicap or distance from the office and is unable to appoint an 
authorized representative.
    (2) If the signed statement or affidavit is not received by the 
State agency within 10 days of the date of report, no replacement shall 
be made. If the 10th day falls on a weekend or holiday, and the 
statement is received the day after the weekend or holiday, the State 
agency shall consider the statement timely received.
    (3) The statement shall be retained in the case record. It shall 
attest to the nonreceipt, theft, loss or destruction of the original 
issuance and specify the reason for the replacement. It shall also state 
that the original or replacement issuance will be returned to the State 
agency if the original issuance is recovered by the household and that 
the household is aware of the penalties for intentional 
misrepresentation of the facts, including but not limited to, a charge 
of perjury for a false claim. In addition, the statement shall advise 
the household that:
    (i) The household may request to be placed on an alternate issuance 
system after one report of nonreceipt;
    (ii) After two reports in a six-month period of loss or theft prior 
to receipt, the household shall be placed on an alternate delivery 
system;
    (iii) After two reports in a six-month period of loss or theft prior 
to receipt and/or theft of an authorization document after receipt the 
State agency may delay or deny further replacements for such causes; and
    (iv) If the statement of nonreceipt is not signed and returned 
within ten (10) days of the date the loss was reported, the State agency 
shall not replace the coupons or authorization document.
    (d) Time limits for making replacements. (1) Replacement issuances 
shall be provided to households within 10 days after report of 
nondelivery or loss (15 days if issuance was by certified or registered 
mail) or within two (2) working days of receiving the signed household 
statement required in paragraph (c) of this section, whichever date is 
later.
    (i) Replacement of mutilated coupons shall be delayed until a 
determination of the value of the coupons can be made in accordance with 
paragraph (f)(3) of this section.
    (ii) If the household has already been issued the maximum allowable 
number of countable replacements, subsequent

[[Page 732]]

replacements shall be delayed until the agency has verified that the 
original issuance was returned or the original authorization document 
was not transacted. In a system using authorization documents, due to 
the time it takes to post and reconcile all authorization documents, it 
may not be known at the time of the replacement request whether prior 
replacements are countable replacements and, therefore, whether the 
household has reached its limit. In such cases, the allotment shall be 
restored when the State agency verifies that the limit on countable 
replacements has not been reached.
    (iii) The State agency shall deny or delay replacement issuances in 
cases in which available documentation indicates that the household's 
request for replacement appears to be fraudulent.
    (2) The household shall be informed of its right to a fair hearing 
to contest the denial or delay of a replacement issuance. Replacements 
shall not be made while the denial or delay is being appealed.
    (e) Replacing issuances lost in the mail or stolen prior to receipt 
by the household. State agencies shall comply with the following 
procedures in replacing issuances reported lost in the mail or stolen 
prior to receipt by the household:
    (1) Determine if the authorization documents or benefits were 
validly issued, if they were actually mailed, if sufficient time has 
elapsed for delivery or if they were returned in the mail. If a delivery 
of a partial allotment is reported, the State agency shall determine the 
value of the coupons not delivered and determine whether the report of 
receipt of a partial allotment is corroborated by evidence that the 
coupon loss was due to damage in the mail before delivery or by a 
discrepancy in the issuance unit's inventory;
    (2) Determine, to the extent possible, the validity of the request 
for a replacement. This includes determining whether the original 
issuance has been returned to the State agency and, in a system 
utilizing authorization documents, whether the original authorization 
document has been transacted and, if so, whether the recipient's 
signature on the authorization document matches the signature on the ID 
card. In a Photo ID area, the State agency shall determine if the ID 
serial number annotated on the authorization document matches the serial 
number on the recipient's ID card;
    (3) Issue a replacement in accordance with paragraphs (b), (c) and 
(d) of this section if the household is eligible;
    (4) Place the household on an alternate delivery system, if 
warranted, in accordance with paragraph (g) of this section; and
    (5) Take other action, such as correcting the address on the master 
issuance file, warranted by the reported nondelivery.
    (f) Replacing issuances after receipt by the household. Upon 
receiving a request for replacement of an issuance reported as stolen or 
destroyed after receipt by the household, the State agency shall 
determine if the issuance was validly issued. The State agency shall 
also comply with all applicable provisions in paragraphs (b), (c) and 
(d) of this section, as well as the following procedures for each type 
of replacement:
    (1) Prior to replacing an authorization document which was reported 
stolen after receipt by the household, the State agency shall determine, 
to the extent possible, the validity of the request for replacement. For 
example, the State agency may determine whether the original 
authorization document has been transacted and, if so, whether the 
signature on the original authorization document matches that on the 
household statement. In a Photo ID or serialized area, the State agency 
shall determine if the ID serial number annotated on the authorization 
document matches the serial number on the recipient's ID card. Any 
replacement which results in duplicate participation shall be considered 
a household error, and the replacement countable, when the ID serial 
number shown on the authorization document matches the serial number on 
the recipient's card, unless the ID card was reported lost or stolen 
prior to the replacement. The State agency may require households, on a 
case-by-case basis, to report the theft to a law enforcement agency and 
to provide verification of such report.
    (2) Prior to replacing destroyed coupons or authorization documents, 
or

[[Page 733]]

destroyed food that was purchased with food stamp benefits, the State 
agency shall determine that the destruction occurred in a household 
misfortune or disaster, such as, but not limited to, a fire or flood. 
This shall be verified through a collateral contact, documentation from 
a community agency including, but not limited to, the fire department or 
the Red Cross, or a home visit. The State agency shall provide 
replacements of coupons, authorization documents, and/or food in the 
actual amount of the loss, but not exceeding one month's allotment, 
unless the exception in paragraph (b)(3) of this section, applies.
    (3) Households cannot receive a replacement for coupons lost or 
stolen after receipt.
    (4) The State agency shall provide replacements for improperly 
manufactured or mutilated coupons or authorization documents as follows:
    (i) Coupons received by a household, and subsequently mutilated or 
found to be improperly manufactured shall be replaced in the amount of 
the loss to the household. State agencies shall replace mutilated 
coupons when three-fifths of a coupon is presented by the household. The 
State agency shall examine the improperly manufactured or mutilated 
coupons to determine the validity of the claim and the amount of coupons 
to be replaced. If the State agency can determine the value of the 
improperly manufactured or mutilated coupons, the State agency shall 
replace the unusable coupons in a dollar-for-dollar exchange. After 
exchanging the coupons and completing a Form FCS-135, Affidavit of 
Return or Exchange of Food Coupons, the State agency shall destroy the 
coupons in accordance with the procedures contained in Sec. 274.7(f). If 
the State agency cannot determine the value of the improperly 
manufactured or mutilated coupons, the State agency shall cancel the 
coupons by writing or stamping ``canceled'' across the face of the 
coupons and forward the coupons to FCS for a determination of the value 
by the U.S. Bureau of Engraving and Printing.
    (ii) Authorization documents received by a household and 
subsequently mutilated or found to be improperly manufactured shall be 
replaced only if they are identifiable. ``Identifiable'' means that the 
State agency is able to determine the amount of the issuance and that 
the authorization document was validly issued to the household within 
the last 30 days. For example, if the authorization document serial 
number is legible, the State agency can determine from the record-for-
issuance or manual authorization document log to which household the 
authorization document was issued, the date of issuance, and the amount. 
Similarly, if the case number and validity period are legible, the State 
agency may be able to determine to whom the authorization document was 
issued and the amount. If more than one authorization document was 
issued to the household and the State agency cannot determine which 
authorization document was mutilated, the replacement shall be issued in 
the lesser amount. Improperly manufactured or mutilated authorization 
documents shall be surrendered to the State agency.
    (g) Alternate issuance system for a household. The State agency 
shall offer to place a household in an alternate issuance system after 
the first report of nonreceipt, or when circumstances exist that 
indicate that the household may not receive its benefits through the 
normal issuance system, such as when a household has a history of 
reported nonreceipt of ATP's. After two requests for replacement of 
original or replacement ATP's reported as nondelivered in a six-month 
period, the State agency shall issue benefits to that household under an 
alternate issuance system. The two requests may be for either an 
original or a replacement ATP. The State agency shall keep the household 
on the alternate issuance system for the length of time the State agency 
determines to be necessary. The State agency may return the household to 
the regular issuance system if the State agency finds that the 
circumstances leading to the loss have changed and the risk of loss has 
lessened. The placement of a household on an alternate issuance system 
and the length of time the household is on this system is not subject to 
the fair hearing process.
    (h) Documentation and reconciliation of replacement issuances. (1) 
The State

[[Page 734]]

agency shall document in the household's case file each request for 
replacement, the date, the reason, and whether or not the replacement 
was provided. This information may be recorded exclusively on the 
household statement required in paragraph (c) of this section.
    (2) The State agency shall maintain, in readily-identifiable form, a 
record of the replacements granted to the household, the reason, the 
month, and whether the replacement was countable as defined in paragraph 
(b)(2)(iv) of this section. The record may be a case action sheet 
maintained in the case file, notations on the master issuance file, if 
readily accessible, or a document maintained solely for this purpose. At 
a minimum, the system shall be able to identify and differentiate among:
    (i) Authorization documents or coupons not received in, or stolen 
from, the mail, and authorization documents stolen after receipt; and
    (ii) Replacement issuances which are not subject to a replacement 
limit.
    (3) Upon completion of reconciliation in a system utilizing 
authorization documents, the State agency shall update the record 
required in paragraph (h)(2) of this section to indicate whether both 
the original and replacement authorization documents were transacted. If 
both were not transacted, the record shall clearly indicate that the 
replacement authorization document was not a countable replacement.
    (4) When a request for replacement is made late in an issuance 
month, the replacement will be issued in a month subsequent to the month 
in which the original authorization document was issued. All 
replacements shall be posted and reconciled to the month of issuance of 
the replacement and may be posted to the month of issuance of the 
original authorization document, so that all duplicate transactions may 
be identified.
    (i) Further action on replacement issuances. The State agency shall 
take the following further actions on replacements:
    (1) On at least a monthly basis, the State agency shall report to 
the appropriate office of the Postal Inspection Service all 
authorization documents reported as stolen or lost in the mail. The 
State agency shall assist the Postal Service during any investigation 
thereof and shall, upon request, supply the Postal Service with 
facsimiles of the original authorization document, if transacted, and 
the replacement authorization document and a copy of the nonreceipt 
statement.
    The State agency shall advise the Postal Service if the original 
authorization document is not transacted.
    (2) When a duplicate replacement authorization document is 
transacted, the State agency shall, at a minimum:
    (i) Compare the handwriting on the authorization documents to 
documents contained in the household's case file, including the 
nonreceipt statement;
    (ii) Establish a claim in accordance with Sec. 273.18, where it 
appears that the household has transacted, or caused both authorization 
documents to be transacted; and
    (iii) Refer the matter to the State agency's investigation unit, 
where indicated.

[54 FR 7004, Feb. 15, 1989, as amended at 54 FR 51351, Dec. 15, 1989; 56 
FR 63617, Dec. 4, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 274.7  Coupon management.

    (a) Coupon inventory management. State agencies shall establish 
coupon inventory management systems which ensure that coupons are 
requisitioned and inventories are maintained in accordance with the 
requirements of these regulations.
    (1) State agencies shall monitor the coupon inventories of coupon 
issuers and bulk storage points to ensure that inventories are neither 
excessive nor insufficient to meet the issuance needs and requirements. 
In determining reasonable inventory needs, State agencies shall 
consider, among other things, the ease and feasibility of resupplying 
such inventories from bulk storage points within the State. The 
inventory levels at coupon issuers and bulk storage points should not 
exceed a six-month supply, taking into account coupons on hand and on 
order.
    (2) State agencies shall establish accounting systems for monitoring 
the inventory activities of coupon issuers. State agencies shall review 
the Form FCS-250, from coupon issuers and bulk

[[Page 735]]

storage points, to determine the propriety and reasonableness of the 
inventories. Forms FCS-261, Advice of Shipment, Forms FCS-300, Advice of 
Transfer (or an approved State agency form), and reports of returned 
mail-issued coupons, reports of replacements of mail-issued coupons, 
reports of improperly manufactured or mutilated coupons, reports of 
shortage or overage of food coupon books and physical inventory controls 
shall be used by State agencies to assure the accuracy of monthly 
reports, issuers' compliance with required inventory levels, and the 
accuracy and reasonableness of coupon orders.
    (b) Coupon controls. State agencies shall establish control and 
security procedures to safeguard coupons that are similar to those used 
to protect currency. The exact nature of security arrangements will 
depend on State agency evaluation of local coupon issuance and storage 
facilities. These arrangements must permit the timely issuance of 
coupons while affording a reasonable degree of coupon security. The 
State agencies, as well as all persons or organizations acting on their 
behalf, shall:
    (1) Safeguard coupons from theft, embezzlement, loss, damage, or 
destruction;
    (2) Avoid unauthorized transfer, negotiation, or use of coupons;
    (3) Avoid issuance and transfer of altered or counterfeit coupons; 
and
    (4) Promptly report in writing to FCS any loss, theft, or 
embezzlement of coupons.
    (c) Coupon requisitioning, shipping and transferring. (1) State 
agencies shall arrange for the ordering of coupons on the Form FCS-260, 
Requisition for Food Coupon Books, and the prompt verification and 
written acceptance of each coupon shipment. FCS shall be furnished with 
appropriate delivery hours and the names of the persons authorized to 
sign delivery acknowledgements.
    (2) FCS shall assess the reasonableness and propriety of food stamp 
requisitions submitted by State agencies based on prior inventory 
changes and shall notify the State agency of any adjustments made to 
requisitions.
    (3) FCS shall ship coupons, in such denominations as it may 
determine necessary, directly to State agency receiving points approved 
by FCS. FCS shall promptly advise the State agency in writing when 
coupons are shipped to receiving points using Form FCS-261, Advice of 
Shipment. Coupons shall be considered delivered to the State agency when 
FCS or its carrier has a signed receipt.
    (4) Once coupons have been accepted by receiving points within the 
State, any further movement of the coupons between coupon issuers and 
bulk storage points within the State is at the risk of the State agency. 
To minimize the risk of loss, coupons should be shipped by armored 
vehicle or some other method of transportation that affords the State 
agency the maximum security available.
    (5) In every instance when coupons are transported within a State, 
the person(s) transporting coupons shall:
    (i) Acknowledge in writing the receipt of the coupons;
    (ii) Provide as much protection for the coupons as is reasonable;
    (iii) Advise issuance supervisors of the routes to be taken, the 
shipment departure time and the estimated arrival time. This 
information, if in written form, may be destroyed after the coupons have 
been received.
    (d) Specimen coupons. FCS may provide upon written request, non-
negotiable specimen coupons to State agencies for the administration of 
the Program and enforcement of the rules, and to authorized food firms 
for the purpose of educating and training employees on Program 
operations.
    (1) The State agency or firm shall store specimen coupons in secure 
storage with access limited to authorized personnel. The State agency or 
firm should maintain a record of specimen coupons received.
    (2) Specimen coupons that are mutilated, improperly manufactured, or 
otherwise unusable, shall not be distributed by the State agency. Such 
coupons shall be destroyed by the State agency and the destruction shall 
be witnessed by two persons and noted on the perpetual inventory records 
maintained by the FCS regional offices for specimen coupons.

[[Page 736]]

    (3) Specimen coupons shall not be issued to private individuals or 
firms for the purpose of collection or display.
    (e) Replacement and destruction of coupons and authorization 
documents by issuance points. (1) The State agency shall provide for the 
replacement to issuers of improperly manufactured or mutilated coupons 
as provided below. Replacement provisions pertaining to households are 
contained in Sec. 274.6.
    (i) The State agency shall examine the improperly manufactured or 
mutilated coupons to determine the validity of the claim and the amount 
of coupons to be replaced.
    (ii) If the State agency can determine the value of an improperly 
manufactured or mutilated coupon, the State agency shall replace the 
unusable coupon, dollar for dollar, when at least three-fifths of the 
coupon is presented by the issuer. After the exchange, the State agency 
shall destroy the unusable coupon in accordance with the procedures 
contained in paragraph (f) of this section.
    (iii) If the State agency cannot determine the value of the 
improperly manufactured or mutilated coupons, the State agency shall 
cancel the coupons by writing or stamping ``canceled'' across the face 
of the coupons and forward the coupons to FCS for a determination of the 
value by the U.S. Bureau of Engraving and Printing. The dollar amount 
shall be shown on the Form FCS-250 report.
    (2) The State agency shall void all authorization documents 
mutilated or otherwise rejected during the preparation process. The 
voided authorization documents shall either be filed for audit purposes 
or destroyed, provided destruction is witnessed by at least two persons 
and the State agency maintains a list of all destroyed authorization 
documents. Provisions pertaining to the replacement of authorized 
documents mutilated subsequent to receipt by a household are provided in 
Sec. 274.6.
    (f) Destruction of unusable coupons found in inventory or received 
as claim payments. (1) The State agency shall require coupon issuers, 
bulk storage points, and claims collection points to dispose of unusable 
coupons received from the manufacturer or received as payment for claims 
within 30 days after the close of the month in which unusable coupons 
shipped from the manufacturer are discovered, or are received from 
recipients as payment for claims. There is no dollar limit on the amount 
of coupons which may be disposed of by the State agency. Disposal shall 
be by one of the following two methods:
    (i) Sending unusable coupons to the State agency for destruction; or
    (ii) Holding the unusable coupons in secure storage pending 
examination and destruction by the State agency at the coupon issuance, 
bulk storage, or claims collection point.
    (2) Prior to the destruction of improperly manufactured or mutilated 
coupons or coupon books that were exchanged, or collected from 
households for claims, the State agency shall:
    (i) Verify that the coupons were improperly manufactured or 
mutilated.
    If one or more boxes of coupons were improperly manufactured, the 
State agency shall contact FCS prior to disposition for instructions on 
the disposition of the coupons. If FCS has not responded within the 30-
day time limit, the State agency shall destroy the box of coupons and 
document the manufacturing irregularity and the book numbers, and retain 
a copy of the State agency's request to FCS for permission to destroy.
    (ii) If either the coupon issuer or bulk storage point, or the State 
agency cannot determine whether coupons or coupon books were in fact 
improperly manufactured or cannot establish the value of the coupons 
involved, the State agency shall promptly forward a written statement of 
findings and the canceled coupon(s) or coupon book(s) to FCS for 
determination.
    (3) The State agency shall destroy the coupons and coupon books by 
burning, shredding, tearing, or cutting so they are not negotiable. Two 
State agency officials shall witness and certify the destruction and 
report the destruction information as follows:
    (i) The destruction of improperly manufactured, mutilated or 
exchanged coupons from coupon issuers and bulk storage points shall be 
reported on the Form FCS-471, Coupon Account and Destruction Report, and 
submitted with

[[Page 737]]

the Form FCS-250 for the appropriate month. For coupons received from 
recipients, a Form FCS-135 shall be completed and attached to the Form 
FCS-471.
    (ii) The destruction of coupons received from claims collection 
points that are the result of the payment of household claims shall be 
reported on the Form FCS-471 (with Form FCS-135 documentation) and 
submitted with the Form FCS-209, Status of Claims Against Households, 
for the appropriate rnonths. A State agency may consolidate its monthly 
Form FCS-471 for claims collection destruction reporting by providing 
one completed Form FCS-471 that reflects the total claims destruction 
figure for each month. However, the State agency must attach a breakdown 
which reports the required Form FCS-471 information for each reporting 
point. If a State agency chooses to submit a consolidated Form FCS-471, 
all individual Forms FCS-471 must be retained by the State agency for 
future review and audit purposes. The Form FCS-135 may not be 
consolidated, and all originals of that form must accompany a 
consolidated Form FCS-471.
    (g) Undeliverable or returned benefits. The State agency shall 
exercise the following security and controls for authorization documents 
and coupons that are undeliverable or returned during the valid issuance 
period. Forms FCS-471 and FCS-135 shall be completed by the State 
agencies, as appropriate.
    (1) Coupons which are in book form, complete, and with original and 
unsigned covers shall be returned to inventory and noted as such on the 
issuance log, and the Form FCS-250.
    (2) Authorization documents shall be recorded in the control log 
noting the serial number, household name and case number. The documents 
shall be kept in secure storage with limited access. The documents may 
be voided as long as households which report nondelivery are provided an 
immediate replacement.
    (h) Old series coupon exchange. Households which have old-series (no 
longer issued) coupons shall be entitled to a dollar-for-dollar exchange 
of old-series coupons for current series coupons. Households in 
possession of old-series coupons shall submit the coupons and a request 
for exchange to the State agency. State agencies may make direct 
exchange to claimants or request FCS to make the exchange. Forms FCS-471 
and FCS-135 shall be completed by the State agencies, as appropriate.

[54 FR 7004, Feb. 15, 1989, as amended at 54 FR 51351, Dec. 15, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 274.8  Responsibilities of coupon issuers, and bulk storage and claims collection points.

    (a) Receipt of coupons. Coupon issuers, and bulk storage and claims 
collection points shall promptly verify and acknowledge, in writing, the 
content of each coupon shipment or coupon transfer delivered to them and 
shall be responsible for the custody, care, control, and storage of 
coupons.
    (b) Inventory levels. Coupon issuers and bulk storage points shall 
maintain a proper level of coupon inventory not in excess of reasonable 
needs, taking into consideration the ease and feasibility of resupplying 
such coupon inventories. Such inventory levels should not exceed the 
six-month supply provided for in Sec. 274.7(a).
    (c) Monthly reporting. Coupon issuers, and bulk storage and claims 
collection points shall report monthly to FCS, through the State agency, 
using Form FCS-250, as provided in Sec. 274.4.
    (d) Supporting documentation. Coupon issuers and bulk storage points 
shall submit to the State agency supporting documentation which will 
allow verification of the monthly report as provided in Sec. 274.4. At a 
minimum, such documentation shall include documents supporting coupon 
shipments, transfers, and issuances. In those States using issuance 
systems with authorization documents, coupon issuers shall submit 
transacted authorization documents batched according to each day's 
activity, in accordance with the schedule prescribed by the State agency 
but, in any case, not less often than monthly.
    (e) Handling of improperly manufactured or mutilated coupons. Coupon 
issuers, and bulk storage and claims collection points shall cancel 
improperly manufactured or mutilated coupons or coupon books by writing 
or stamping

[[Page 738]]

``canceled'' across the face of the coupon(s) and coupon book(s). 
Depending upon State agency policy, the coupon issuer or bulk storage 
point shall forward the coupons with the appropriate documentation 
(determined by the State agency) to the State agency, or hold the 
coupons in secure storage, pending examination and destruction by the 
State agency at the coupon issuer, bulk storage point or claims 
collection location. The documentation is not required if the State 
agency inspects the coupons at the issuance, storage or collection 
point. Additional requirements pertaining to the handling of these types 
of coupons by the State agency are provided in Sec. 274.7(e).


<R05>
Sec. 274.9  Closeout of a coupon issuer.

    (a) Definition of responsibilities. Whenever the services of a 
coupon issuer or bulk storage point are terminated, the State agency 
shall perform the responsibilities described below. If a coupon issuer 
or bulk storage point has more than one functioning unit and one of 
these facilities is terminated, the coupon issuer or bulk storage point 
shall fulfill the responsibilities described in paragraphs (b) and (c) 
of this section. The coupon issuer or bulk storage point shall notify 
the State agency of the pending termination of any of its services prior 
to the actual termination. The State agency shall promptly notify FCS as 
provided in Sec. 274.1(d).
    (b) Closeout accountability. The State agency shall perform a 
closeout audit of a coupon issuer or bulk storage point within 30 days 
of termination of the issuance or storage point. The State agency shall 
report the findings of the audit to FCS immediately upon its completion. 
If the audit determines that the final Form FCS-250 is incorrect, the 
State agency shall promptly provide a corrected report to FCS.
    (c) Transfer of coupon inventory. (1) Prior to the transfer of 
coupon inventory to another coupon issuer or bulk storage point, the 
State agency shall perform an actual physical count of coupons on hand.
    (2) The State agency shall transfer the inventory to another coupon 
issuer or bulk storage point, preferably within the same project area. 
The transfer of coupons shall be properly reported and documented by 
both the point being terminated and the point receiving the inventory.
    (d) Maintenance of participant service. (1) At least 30 days before 
actual termination of a coupon issuer, the State agency shall notify 
project area participants of the impending closure. Notification shall 
include identification of alternative issuance locations and available 
public transportation. The State agency shall post notices at the 
offices of the coupon issuer of the impending closure and may use mass 
media or notices with allotments to advise participants about the 
expected closure of the issuance office.
    (2) If closure of the issuer will affect a substantial portion of 
the caseload or a specific geographic area, the State agency shall take 
whatever action is necessary to maintain participant service without 
interruption.
    (3) If a coupon issuer or bulk storage point is to be closed for 
noncompliance with contractual requirements and alternative issuance 
facilities or systems are not readily available, the State agency may 
continue to use the coupon issuer or bulk storage point for a limited 
time. In this situation, the State agency shall perform weekly onsite 
reconciliations of coupon issuance. The State agency shall continue to 
actively seek other issuance or storage alternatives.


<R05>
Sec. 274.10  Use of identification cards and redemption of coupons by eligible households.

    (a) General provisions. State agencies shall issue an ID card to 
each certified household as proof of Program eligibility. Upon request, 
the household or the authorized representative, shall present the 
household's ID card at issuance points, retail food stores or meal 
services in order to transact the allotment authorization or when 
exchanging benefits for eligible food. The household member or members 
whose name(s) appear on the ID card shall sign the coupon books issued 
to the household.
    (1) All ID cards shall be issued in the name of the household member 
who is authorized to receive the household's issuance. In areas not 
designated by FCS as requiring Photo ID cards, the

[[Page 739]]

ID card shall contain space for the name and signature of the household 
member to whom the coupon allotment is to be issued and for any 
authorized representatives designated by the household. Section 274.5(b) 
provides further requirements pertaining to emergency authorized 
representatives. Any person listed on the ID card shall sign the ID card 
before that person can use it to obtain benefits. If the household does 
not name an authorized representative, the State agency shall void that 
area of the ID card to prevent names and signatures being entered at a 
later date. The ID card may be serially numbered.
    (2) The State agency shall limit issuance of ID cards to the time of 
initial certification, with replacements made only in instances of loss, 
mutilation, destruction, changes in the person authorized to obtain 
coupons, or when the State agency determines that new ID cards are 
needed to keep the photographs up-to-date or if the State agency changes 
its ID card format or system. Whenever possible, the State agency shall 
collect the ID card that it is replacing.
    (3) The State agency shall place an expiration date on all temporary 
ID cards, and on the regular ID cards issued to households certified for 
delivered meals for a specific period, and to homeless households 
certified for restaurant meals.
    (4) Specially-marked ID cards shall be issued in the following 
circumstances:
    (i) Eligible household members 60 years of age or over or members 
who are housebound, physically handicapped, or otherwise disabled to the 
extent that they are unable to adequately prepare all their meals, and 
their spouses, may use coupons to purchase meals prepared for and 
delivered to them by a nonprofit meal delivery service authorized by 
FCS. Any household eligible for and interested in using delivered meal 
services shall have its ID card marked with the letter ``M''.
    (ii) Eligible household members 60 years of age or over and their 
spouses, or those receiving SSI and their spouses, may use coupons 
issued to them to purchase meals prepared especially for them at 
communal dining facilities authorized by FCS for that purpose. Any 
household eligible for and interested in using communal dining 
facilities in those States or project areas where restaurants are 
authorized to accept food stamps, shall have its ID card marked with the 
letters ``CD''. In areas where restaurants are not authorized to accept 
food stamps, the State or project area may mark such ID's with the 
letters ``CD''.
    (iii) Eligible homeless households may use food stamp benefits to 
purchase meals from restaurants authorized by FCS for such purpose. Any 
homeless household eligible for, and interested in, using restaurants in 
those areas where restaurants are authorized to accept food stamp 
benefits shall have a specially-marked ID card. The State agency shall 
provide samples of specially-marked ID cards to authorized restaurants.
    (iv) Eligible households residing in areas of Alaska determined by 
FCS as areas where access to retail food stores is difficult and which 
rely substantially on hunting and fishing for subsistence may use all or 
any part of the coupons issued to purchase hunting and fishing equipment 
such as nets, hooks, rods, harpoons and knives, but may not use coupons 
to purchase firearms, ammunition, and other explosives. Any household 
residing in a remote section of Alaska which has been determined by FCS 
to be an area in which food coupons may be used to purchase hunting and 
fishing equipment shall have its ID card marked with the letters ``HF''.
    (5) ID cards delivered to households by mail shall not be mailed in 
the same envelope with authorization documents or coupons.
    (b) Photo ID cards. (1) Photo ID cards shall be issued in those 
project areas or portions thereof with 100,000 or more food stamp 
participants, except for those project areas serviced entirely by mail 
issuance or an Electronic Benefit Transfer system, or where FCS, in 
consultation with the Office of the Inspector General, approves a State 
agency's request for an exemption. FCS shall respond to a State agency's 
request for exemption within 30 days of its receipt of the request.

[[Page 740]]

    (i) FCS shall evaluate the January participation data reported as an 
attachment to the March Form FCS-388 report. Based on the evaluation, 
FCS shall notify State agencies at the beginning of each fiscal year of 
any areas that either require or no longer require the use of Photo ID 
cards. In cases where an entire State is a single project area, FCS 
shall consult with the State agency to determine whether Photo IDs 
should be required in any specific parts of the project area. At the 
conclusion of this consultation, FCS shall inform the State agency 
whether the use of Photo IDs will be mandated in any parts of the State 
agency, based on the need to protect Program integrity, and the cost-
effectiveness of Photo ID cards.
    (ii) In cases where a project area serves between 100,000 and 
110,000 participants, FCS shall inform the State agency in which the 
project area is located that it is prepared to mandate the use of Photo 
IDs in the project area. FCS shall also inform the State agency that it 
will not mandate use of Photo ID's if, within 30 days of being notified 
by FCS that Photo ID's must be used, the State agency demonstrates to 
FCS that participation in the project areas has fallen below the 100,000 
participant level in the recent past, or justifies to FCS why 
participation is likely to fall below that level during the next year.
    (2) FCS may, at any time, in consultation with the Office of the 
Inspector General, designate project areas or portions thereof with less 
than 100,000 participants as requiring the use of Photo ID cards if, in 
reviewing such factors as the level of duplicate issuances and results 
of management evaluation reviews, the Department determines that the 
issuance of Photo ID cards in such areas would be justified.
    (3) A State agency may request that FCS require that Photo IDs be 
mandated throughout either the entire State or specified project areas. 
FCS shall respond to such requests within 30 days of the request and, if 
the request is not approved, FCS shall justify its reasons for the 
disapproval to the State agency.
    (4) In project areas where issuance of Photo ID cards is mandatory, 
the State agency shall issue a Photo ID card at the time of 
certification to each eligible household except those listed in 
Sec. 274.10(b)(4). Households exempt from mandated Photo ID cards shall 
be issued ID cards which meet the specifications in paragraph (d) of 
this section except that in lieu of a photograph, the State agency shall 
annotate the cards to show an exception was granted to the household and 
that the ID card is valid. The following households are exempt from the 
Photo ID requirement:
    (i) Households certified by out-of-office interviews as specified in 
Sec. 273.2(e)(2). However, the State agency shall replace the non-Photo 
ID card issued to such households with a Photo ID card when the 
appropriate household member or authorized representative visits the 
certification office. The State agency shall not require any member of 
such a household to visit the office exclusively for the purpose of 
issuing a Photo ID card;
    (ii) Household members whose religion does not allow them to be 
photographed. The State agency shall require such a household to provide 
a signed statement to the effect that the members' religious beliefs do 
not allow them to be photographed;
    (iii) Households entitled to expedited service if the State agency's 
Photo ID card system is incapable of producing a Photo ID card in time 
for the household to participate as required by Sec. 273.2(i). A Photo 
ID card shall be issued to the household prior to issuance of the 
household's next allotment;
    (iv) Households certified under the SSA-food stamp joint processing 
rules in Sec. 273.2(k). State agencies shall not require such households 
to obtain Photo IDs as long as they continue to be certified for food 
stamps at SSA offices. However, a household shall obtain a Photo ID if a 
household member or authorized representative reports to a food stamp 
office for recertification; and,
    (v) Residents of drug/alcohol treatment and rehabilitation programs.
    (5) In addition to the general provisions in paragraph (a) of this 
section, Photo ID cards shall include the photograph of the person who 
will receive the household's issuance; i.e., who will

[[Page 741]]

either transact the household's authorization document or pick up the 
household's allotment. A Photo ID card shall be signed by only the 
person pictured on the card, who may be the household member or 
authorized representative. Only the person photographed may obtain the 
household's coupons. All Photo ID card formats are subject to FCS 
approval.
    (6) Photo ID cards shall be serially numbered and laminated after 
they are signed by the person whose photograph appears on the card. ID 
cards shall also include a color photograph of the person designated by 
the household to obtain coupons and the household's case number or other 
identifying information.
    (7) A Photo ID card used to receive benefits under a welfare or 
public assistance program may be adapted for food stamp purposes if it 
meets the specifications contained in this section and can be annotated 
to indicate food stamp eligibility.
    (8) The State agency shall provide a household with a reasonable 
opportunity to obtain a food stamp Photo ID card in any project area 
where its use is mandated.
    (i) A household required to have a Photo ID card shall not 
participate until such time as a household member or a designated 
authorized representative obtains such a card. If a designated 
authorized representative does not obtain the required Photo ID, the 
household may designate a household member or another authorized 
representative to be photographed.
    (ii) If the person whose photograph appears on the ID is unable to 
travel to the issuance point to obtain a particular allotment, the 
household may use the emergency authorized representative procedures 
provided in Sec. 274.5 and in paragraph (c) of this section.
    (9) State agencies which have the capability may develop systems to 
issue more than one household member a Photo ID card. These systems 
shall ensure that the safeguards provided by Photo ID cards, as 
specified in this section, are maintained.
    (10) If a mutilated or altered Photo ID card is presented at the 
issuance point, the household shall obtain a replacement Photo ID card 
prior to issuance.
    (11) A household shall be entitled to unobtained benefits, lost as a 
result of being unable to obtain a particular allotment, if the issuance 
month elapses between the time the household requested a replacement 
Photo ID card and the delivery of that card to the household.
    (12) FCS may waive one or more of the requirements in this section 
if a State agency can demonstrate to FCS that its alternate ID card or 
system will provide adequate safeguards against fraudulent and/or 
duplicate issuances.
    (c) Emergency authorized representative and recipient 
identification. State agencies shall develop a method by which a 
household may designate an emergency authorized representative to obtain 
the household's allotment when none of the persons specified on the ID 
is available.
    (1) At a minimum, the method developed by the State agency shall 
require a document with the signature of the emergency authorized 
representative as well as a place for the household member named on the 
ID card to sign designating the emergency authorized representative and 
attesting to the signature of the emergency authorized representative. 
The designation may be on the ID card or authorization document or a 
separate form. The household shall not be required to travel to a food 
stamp office to execute an emergency designation. The emergency 
authorized representative may present a separately written and signed 
statement from the head of the household or his or her spouse, 
authorizing the issuance of the certified household's food stamps to the 
authorized representative. The emergency representative shall sign the 
written statement from the household and present the statement and the 
household ID card to obtain the allotment. A separate written 
designation is required each time an emergency representative is 
authorized.
    (2) In any issuance system, the cashier shall compare the signatures 
on the issuance document and on the ID card. If they do not match, 
issuance shall not be made.

[[Page 742]]

    (i) If the household is required by these regulations to present a 
Photo ID card, coupons shall be issued only when the person presenting 
the authorization document or requesting the coupons is pictured on the 
ID card. The cashier shall write the serial number of the Photo ID card 
on the authorization or issuance document.
    (ii) If the Photo ID card appears to be mutilated or altered, the 
issuing agent shall not issue the coupons, but shall require the 
household to obtain a replacement ID card from the State agency.
    (d) Eligible food. A household member should sign each coupon book 
issued to the household. The coupons may be used only by the household, 
or other persons the household selects, to purchase eligible food for 
the household, which includes, for certain households residing in 
certain designated areas of Alaska, the purchase of hunting and fishing 
equipment with coupons. Uncanceled and unendorsed coupons of $1 
denomination, returned as change by authorized retail food stores, may 
be presented as payment for eligible food. All other detached coupons 
may be accepted only if accompanied by the coupon book which bears the 
same serial number as the detached coupons. It is the right of the 
household or the authorized representative to detach the coupons from 
the book.
    (e) Meals-on-wheels. Eligible household members 60 years of age or 
over or members who are housebound, physically handicapped, or otherwise 
disabled to the extent that they are unable to adequately prepare all 
their meals, and their spouses, may use coupons to purchase meals 
prepared for and delivered to them by a nonprofit meal delivery service 
authorized by FCS.
    (f) Residents of certain institutions. (1) Members of eligible 
households who are narcotics addicts or alcoholics and who regularly 
participate in a drug or alcoholic treatment and rehabilitation program 
may use coupons to purchase food prepared for them during the course of 
such program by a private nonprofit organization or institution or a 
publicly operated community mental health center which is authorized by 
FCS to redeem the coupons through wholesalers in accordance with 
Sec. 278.1, or which redeems coupons at retail food stores as the 
authorized representative of participating households in accordance with 
Sec. 278.2(g).
    (2) Eligible residents of a group living arrangement may use coupons 
issued to them to purchase meals prepared especially for them at a group 
living arrangement which is authorized by FCS to redeem coupons at 
wholesalers in accordance with Sec. 278.1, or which redeems coupons at 
retail food stores as the authorized representative of participating 
households in accordance with Sec. 278.2(g).
    (3) Residents of shelters for battered women and children as defined 
in s271.2 may use their coupons to purchase meals prepared especially 
for them at a shelter which is authorized by FCS in accordance with 
Sec. 278.1 to redeem at wholesalers, or which redeems at retailers as 
the authorized representative of participating household in accordance 
with Sec. 278.2(g).
    (g) Homeless food stamp households. Homeless food stamp households 
may use their food stamp benefits to purchase prepared meals from 
authorized homeless meal providers.
    (h) Use of ID cards. Upon request, the household or the authorized 
representative shall present the household's ID card to the retail food 
store or meal service when exchanging food coupons for eligible food.
    (i) Prior payment prohibition. Coupons shall not be used to pay for 
any eligible food purchased prior to the time at which the coupons are 
presented to authorized retail food stores or meal services. Neither 
shall coupons be used to pay for any eligible food in advance of the 
receipt of food, except when prior payment is for food purchased from a 
nonprofit cooperative food purchasing venture.
    (j) Cash change. When change in an amount less than $1 is required 
in a coupon transaction, the household shall receive the change in cash 
not to exceed 99 cents. However, in the case of homeless food stamp 
households, neither cash change nor credit slips shall be returned for 
coupons used for the purchase of prepared meals from authorized homeless 
meal providers. Such meal providers may use uncancelled

[[Page 743]]

and unmarked $1 coupons which were previously accepted for meals served 
to food stamp recipients when change is required for $5 and $10 coupons. 
However, in the case of homeless food stamp households, neither cash 
change nor credit slips shall be returned for food stamps used for the 
purchase of prepared meals from authorized public and private nonprofit 
homeless meal providers. Such meal providers may use the lowest 
denomination coupons that are uncancelled and unmarked for making change 
in food stamp transactions. Restaurants which are authorized by FCS 
under Sec. 278.1 to provide meals to homeless food stamp recipients 
shall return cash change to such recipients in food stamp transactions 
when the amount of change due is less than one dollar. If change of one 
dollar or more is due, uncancelled and unmarked one dollar coupons shall 
also be used for change.

[54 FR 7004, Feb. 15, 1989, as amended at 54 FR 51352, Dec. 15, 1989; 57 
FR 11249, Apr. 1, 1992; 61 FR 53600, Oct. 15, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 274.11  Issuance and inventory record retention, and forms security.

    (a) Availability of records. The State agency shall maintain 
issuance, inventory, reconciliation, and other accountability records 
for a period of three years as specified in Sec. 272.1(f) of this 
chapter. This period may be extended at the written request of FNS.
    (1) Issuance, inventory, reconciliation, and other accountability 
records shall include all Agency, State, and local forms involved in the 
State agency's receipt, storage, handling, issuance, and destruction of 
coupons completed by contract agents or any other individuals or 
entities involved in issuance or inventory, as well as those completed 
by the State agency.
    (2) In lieu of the records themselves, easily retrievable microfilm, 
microfiche, or computer tapes which contain the required information may 
be maintained.
    (b) Control of issuance documents. The State agency shall control 
all issuance documents which establish household eligibility while the 
documents are transferred and processed within the State agency. The 
State agency shall use numbers, batching, inventory control logs, or 
similar controls from the point of initial receipt through the issuance 
and reconciliation process. The State agency shall also ensure the 
security and control of authorization documents in transit from the 
manufacturer to the State agency.
    (c) Accountable documents. (1) HIR cards, authorization documents, 
and mandated Photo ID cards shall be considered accountable documents. 
The State agency shall provide the following minimum security and 
control procedures for these documents:
    (i) Preprinted serial numbers;
    (ii) Secure storage;
    (iii) Access limited to authorized personnel;
    (iv) Bulk inventory control records;
    (v) Subsequent control records maintained through the point of 
issuance or use, and
    (vi) Periodic review and validation of inventory controls and 
records by parties not otherwise involved in maintaining control 
records.
    (2) For notices of change which initiate, update or terminate the 
master issuance file, and blank ID cards, the State agency shall, at a 
minimum, provide secure storage and shall limit access to authorized 
personnel.

[54 FR 7004, Feb. 15, 1989, as amended at 60 FR 20183, Apr. 25, 1995]


<R05>
Sec. 274.12  Electronic Benefit Transfer issuance system approval standards.

    (a) General. This section establishes rules for the approval, 
implementation and operation of on-line Electronic Benefit Transfer 
(EBT) systems for the Food Stamp Program as an alternative to issuing 
food stamp coupons. An on-line EBT system is a computer-based system in 
which the benefit authorization is received from a central computer 
through a point-of-sale (POS) terminal. Eligible households utilize 
magnetic-stripe plastic cards and have accounts maintained at the 
central computer in lieu of food stamp coupons to purchase food items at 
authorized food retailers. Once certified, the household's benefits are 
electronically loaded into a central computer account for each month 
during the certification period. Checkout lanes at authorized food 
retailers are to be equipped with POS terminals. When the transaction

[[Page 744]]

occurs, the POS terminals connect on-line to the central computer 
database; verify the validity of the Personal Identification Number 
(PIN), card number, and the amount of available benefits in an EBT 
account; obtain authorization for each purchase and initiate the 
debiting of the household's account and the crediting of the retailer's 
account.
    (b) Program Administration. (1) The State food stamp agency shall 
submit Planning and Implementation Advanced Planning Documents (APDs) 
for FCS approval in accordance with the requirements of Sec. 277.18 of 
this chapter and this section. The State agency may implement an EBT 
system statewide or in only some areas of the State. However, the State 
agency shall implement EBT systems in a pilot area prior to expansion 
Statewide or to other project areas. The areas of pilot operation and 
full-scale operation shall be identified in the Planning APD when 
submitted to FCS for approval.
    (2) The State agency shall be responsible for the coordination and 
management of the EBT system. The Secretary may suspend or terminate 
some or all EBT system funding or withdraw approval of the EBT system 
from the State agency upon a finding that the State agency or its 
contracted representative has failed to comply with the requirements of 
this section and/or Sec. 277.18 of this chapter.
    (3) All EBT systems within a State must follow a singular EBT APD 
and system architecture submitted by the State agency. Multiple EBT 
designs will be acceptable only if: such designs can be fully justified 
by the State agency; the system differences are transparent to 
participating households that move within the State; operating costs are 
the same or lower; and the ability of the different systems to readily 
communicate (transaction interchange) with one another.
    (4) The State agency must provide written approval of the Planning 
and Implementation APDs from other participating Federal agencies or 
indicate that approval is being sought simultaneously from participating 
Federal agencies. The State agency shall indicate how it plans to 
incorporate additional programs into the EBT system if it anticipates 
the addition of other public assistance programs concurrent with or 
after implementation of the Food Stamp Program EBT system. The State 
agency shall also consult with the State agency officials responsible 
for administering the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, 
Infants and Children (WIC) prior to submitting the Planning APD for FCS 
approval.
    (c) Pilot Project Approval Requirements--(1) EBT Planning APD. The 
State agency shall comply with the two-stage approval process for APDs 
in submitting an EBT system proposal to FCS for approval. In addition to 
the requirements for a Planning APD specified under Sec. 277.18(d)(1) of 
this chapter, the State agency shall commit itself to provide the 
following as part of the project planning activities to FCS for 
approval:
    (i) Pilot Project Site and Expanded Site Descriptions. At a minimum, 
the proposed pilot project site and expanded site descriptions shall 
include the geographical boundaries, average number and characteristics 
of food stamp program participants and households, the number and type 
of authorized food retailers and authorized retailers bordering the 
pilot and expanded areas, the food stamp redemption patterns of food 
retailers, the status of commercial POS deployment and the estimated 
number of checkout lanes that will require POS equipment; and
    (ii) A Description of Major Contacts. A description of initial 
contacts the State agency has made in the proposed pilot area among food 
retailers, financial institutions and households or their 
representatives that may be affected by implementation of the EBT 
system. Written commitments from the retail grocer community (including 
supermarket chains, independent retailers, and convenience stores) and 
participating financial institutions in the pilot area shall be provided 
along with other documentation that demonstrates the willingness to 
support the proposed EBT system within the pilot area and expanded 
system area. The State agency shall submit evidence of contacts with 
recipient organizations and others.

[[Page 745]]

    (2) EBT Implementation APD. The EBT Implementation APD shall include 
the completed documents required under Sec. 277.18 of this chapter for 
Implementation APDs, where appropriate. In addition, EBT Implementation 
APDs shall include the detailed pilot project site description and 
expanded site description, as described in this paragraph. Also, the 
State agency shall commit to completing and submitting the following 
documents for FCS approval and obtaining such approval prior to issuance 
of benefits to eligible households in the pilot project area:
    (i) A Functional Demonstration Plan. The functional demonstration 
plan shall include:
    (A) The schedule, procedures, and test data for performing the 
functional requirements prescribed in paragraph (e) of this section in 
combination with the system components described by the approved System 
Design;
    (B) The procedures for performing the functional demonstration, each 
participant's responsibility during the demonstration, and procedures 
for collecting data to evaluate system functionality. The Department 
reserves the right to participate and conduct independent testing as 
necessary during the Functional Demonstration.
    (ii) A Functional Demonstration Report. Upon the completion of the 
functional requirements demonstration test, the State agency shall 
submit a Functional Demonstration report. The report shall summarize the 
activities, describe major problems encountered and proposed solutions, 
and provide the timetable for completing any system revisions. 
Resolution of any problems identified during the functional 
demonstration shall be completed prior to advancing towards the 
acceptance test.
    (iii) An Acceptance Test Plan. The Acceptance Test Plan for the 
pilot project shall describe the methodology to be utilized to verify 
that the EBT system complies with Food Stamp Program requirements and 
System Design specifications. At a minimum, the Acceptance Test Plan 
shall address:
    (A) The types of testing to be performed;
    (B) The organization of the test team and associated 
responsibilities, test database generation, test case development, test 
schedule, and the documentation of test results. Acceptance testing 
shall include functional requirements testing, error condition handling 
and destructive testing, security testing, recovery testing, controls 
testing, stress and throughput performance testing, and regression 
testing;
    (C) A ``what-if'' component shall also be included to permit the 
opportunity for observers and participants to test possible scenarios in 
a free-form manner.
    (D) The Department reserves the right to participate and conduct 
independent testing as necessary during the Acceptance testing and 
appropriate events during system design, development, implementation and 
operation.
    (iv) An Acceptance Test Report. The State agency shall provide a 
separate report after the completion of the acceptance test. The report 
shall summarize the activities, describe any discrepancies, describe the 
proposed solutions to discrepancies, and the timetable for their 
retesting and completion. In addition, the report shall contain the 
State agency's recommendations regarding implementation of the EBT 
system in the pilot site.
    (v) A Prototype Food Retailer Agreement. The State agency shall 
enter an agreement with each food retailer that complies with the 
requirements of paragraph (g)(6) of this section.
    (vi) A Pilot Project Implementation Plan. The pilot project 
implementation plan shall include the following:
    (A) A description of the tools, procedures, detailed schedules, and 
resources needed to implement the pilot project;
    (B) The equipment acquisition and installation requirements, 
ordering schedules, and system and component testing;
    (C) A phase-in strategy which permits a measured and orderly 
transition to EBT. In describing this strategy, the plan shall address 
training schedules that avoid disruption of normal shopping patterns and 
operations of participating households and food retailers. Training of 
food stamp households, State agency personnel and retailers and/or their 
trainers shall be coordinated with the installation of equipment in 
retail stores;

[[Page 746]]

    (D) A description of on-going tasks associated with fine-tuning the 
system and making any corrective actions necessary to meet contractual 
requirements. The description shall also address those tasks associated 
with on-going training, document updates, equipment maintenance, on-site 
support and system adjustments, as needed to meet Food Stamp Program 
requirements; and,
    (E) A plan for orderly phase-out of the pilot project if it is 
demonstrated during the pilot project operations that the system is not 
acceptable.
    (vii) A Contingency Plan. The State agency shall submit a written 
contingency plan for FCS approval. The contingency plan shall contain 
information regarding the back-up issuance system that will be activated 
in the event of an emergency shut-down which results in short-term or 
extended system inaccessibility, or total discontinuation of EBT system 
operations. The contingency plan shall be incorporated into the State 
system security plan after FCS approval as prescribed at Sec. 277.18(p) 
of this chapter.
    (3) EBT Implementation APD Budget. The Implementation APD budget 
shall be prepared and submitted for FCS approval in accordance with the 
requirements of paragraph (k) of this section and Sec. 277.18(d)(2) of 
this chapter.
    (i) Coupon Issuance Cap. The State agency shall provide an analysis 
of current statewide coupon issuance costs as compared to the projected 
costs of issuing benefits in the State after implementation of the EBT 
system, both for the EBT system and any remaining coupon issuance areas. 
The coupon issuance cap shall be determined as follows:
    (A) The State agency shall utilize the statewide coupon issuance 
costs, which include State agency costs in paragraph (c)(3)(ii) of this 
section and Federal costs in paragraph (c)(3)(iii) of this section, 
calculated from issuance costs for the four Federal fiscal quarters 
prior to submitting the EBT Implementation APD. Case-month cost 
represents the average Federal share of administrative costs to issue 
program benefits to a case for one month. An alternative base period may 
be utilized, with approval from FCS, if the State agency can demonstrate 
that the alternative period would be more accurate or other 
circumstances prevent use of the previous four Federal fiscal quarters 
as the baseline.
    (B) The annual Federal issuance cap, to be in place from the time 
benefits are first issued though EBT, shall be calculated by multiplying 
the case-month cost for the coupon system being replaced by the number 
of food stamp program case-months statewide for the year and by the 
appropriate inflation factor. The inflation factor shall be derived in 
accordance with paragraph (k) of this section. The issuance cap shall be 
effective from the date benefits are issued to households through the 
EBT system during the pilot project.
    (ii) State Coupon Issuance Costs.
    (A) Beginning at the point the household is established in the 
Issuance Authorization File, all direct State administrative costs of 
the current coupon issuance system shall be identified.
    (B) State operating costs of coupon issuance shall include, but 
shall not be limited to, direct allowable costs for personnel, fringe 
benefits, travel, equipment, supplies, contracts, construction and other 
direct costs associated with coupon issuance. Indirect costs shall not 
be included in the determination of State issuance costs for purposes of 
calculating the coupon issuance cap. Such indirect costs are defined as 
costs which are included in the State agency's indirect cost proposal 
and approved for cost charging through an indirect cost rate. The State 
agency shall provide narrative explanations to clarify each category and 
how it was calculated.
    (iii) Federal Coupon Issuance Costs. Federal costs associated with 
the issuance of coupons in a particular State are to be included in the 
coupon issuance cap. These Federal costs shall include:
    (A) Case-month costs for coupon printing, shipping, processing, and 
reconciliation. The case-month figure associated with these costs will 
be available from FCS upon request;
    (B) Monthly mail issuance losses up to the tolerance limit approved 
by FCS;

[[Page 747]]

    (C) Monthly duplicate issuance losses absorbed by FCS; and
    (D) Fifty percent of the allowable State administrative costs 
pertaining to coupon issuance.
    (iv) EBT Equipment and Start-up Costs.
    (A) For the purpose of assigning the costs to the post-EBT 
implementation issuance cap, costs to design and develop the EBT system, 
incurred from the approval date of the Implementation APD but prior to 
actual issuance of benefits through the EBT system, shall be assigned 
over the life of the EBT system for a period not to exceed seven years. 
The seven year period shall begin when the initial household is issued 
benefits in the pilot project. Such design and development costs shall 
be assigned at the end of the period and claims shall be made for any 
assigned costs that exceed the total cap for the seven years. For a 
period of one year from the first issuance in the pilot, costs incurred 
during the pilot project that exceed the issuance cap may be treated in 
the same manner as these design and development costs and assigned to 
the cap at the end of the seven year period.
    (B) For the purpose of claiming Federal financial participation in 
capital expenditures, such costs shall be charged from the time 
operations begin in accordance with 7 CFR 277.18(i)(3) and appendix A of 
7 CFR 277.18. Equipment costs shall include the cost of installation and 
shall be applied to the issuance funding cap as amortized. EBT equipment 
costs shall be identified in the EBT system budget as a separate 
component, both for the pilot and the fully operational system.
    (v) Costs of EBT Planning APD. The costs for EBT project planning 
activities shall be excluded from the case-month issuance cap described 
in paragraph (c)(3) of this section. Planning costs shall include costs 
attributed to the preparation of the Planning APD and the completion of 
the documentation contained in the FCS approved Planning APD.
    (vi) EBT operational costs. In accordance with appendix A of 
Sec. 277.18 of this chapter, the State agency shall identify the 
allowable EBT operational costs for reimbursement. Operations costs 
shall begin from the date benefits are issued to recipients in the pilot 
project. The State agency shall provide cost information as follows:
    (A) The State agency shall include EBT system operation costs which 
include, as appropriate, but are not limited to: labor hours and costs 
by job category and by program for each unit, direct non-labor costs by 
program for each agency, vendor charges, if any, computer usage (CPU, 
disk storage, tapes, printing), the equipment amortization/lease and 
maintenance (including POS hardware and installation costs), 
telecommunications installations, recurring telecommunications, benefit 
card stock and equipment, supplies, printing and reproduction, travel, 
postage, automated clearinghouse charges, wire transfer fees and other 
such settlement fees, and other direct costs. Indirect costs shall not 
be included as EBT system operation costs.
    (B) The State agency shall be responsible for the post-EBT 
implementation issuance costs that exceed the coupon issuance cap in any 
one year. These costs shall include all issuance costs incurred 
Statewide for food coupon and EBT issuance. The State agency shall 
document any issuance costs it projects to be above the cap in the 
budget submitted to FCS for approval.
    (4) Pilot Project Reporting. (i) A quarterly report containing the 
following information delineated by month shall be provided to FCS by 
the end of the month following each Federal fiscal quarter. The 
quarterly report shall contain, at a minimum:
    (A) A summary, by task, of major completed activities and scheduled 
activities for the upcoming period.
    (B) The number of active cases for each month;
    (C) The number and dollar amount of food stamp purchases in total 
and by store ID;
    (D) The number and dollar amount of food stamp reversals, in total 
and by store ID;
    (E) The total number and dollar amount of manual sales authorized;
    (F) The total number and dollar amount of issuances posted to EBT 
accounts during the month, delineated by

[[Page 748]]

public assistance Food Stamp households and non-public assistance Food 
Stamp households;
    (G) Total number and dollar amount of grocer credits during 
settlement (by day of month);
    (H) Total number of retailers added to or deleted from the system as 
defined under part 278 of this chapter;
    (I) Number and dollar amount of food stamp benefits converted to 
coupons;
    (J) Total number of Food Stamp Program balance inquiries, by type of 
device such as Automated Teller Machines, POS terminals or Audio 
Response Units (ARUs) or hotline telephone numbers;
    (K) Total number of rejected transactions, grouped by reasons (e.g., 
invalid PIN, insufficient funds, invalid transaction type for device, 
etc.);
    (L) The number of access cards issued by the type of case (new, 
recertification, replacement for loss, damage or theft);
    (M) Number of client calls and grocer calls to the ARU or hotline 
number;
    (N) The average number of transactions by type;
    (O) Average dollar value of purchases per case-month;
    (P) Transactions utilized per day as a percentage of transactions 
through the system each month;
    (Q) Problems encountered, their status, actions taken by the State 
agency and any support needed from FCS to resolve them; and
    (R) Anticipated delays, reasons for the delays, and corrective 
actions planned or taken that require an amendment to the Project Work 
Plan. The Project Work Plan shall be updated and submitted with each 
quarterly report.
    (ii) The State agency shall submit APD Updates as prescribed in 
Sec. 277.18 of this chapter and paragraph (d) of this section.
    (5) Cost Analysis. (i) The State agency shall be responsible for 
conducting a cost analysis comparing the actual EBT pilot project costs 
to the costs of the EBT system operations projected in the 
Implementation APD and the costs of the coupon issuance system being 
replaced.
    (ii) The cost analysis may be conducted by State agency staff or by 
an independent contractor. The cost analysis shall represent the costs 
of the pilot as costs per case-month.
    (iii) The State agency shall report in the cost analysis all start-
up costs that shall be amortized under the issuance cap for the EBT 
system. At a minimum, the State agency shall identify:
    (A) The labor hours and costs by job category for each unit (e.g., 
the Food Stamp Program Section, the financial assistance section, the 
EBT project section, etc.) of the State and local agencies and for each 
vendor;
    (B) The direct costs for each agency and vendor. The line items to 
be included are computer usage (CPU, disk storage, tapes, printing), the 
equipment amortization/lease and maintenance (excluding POS hardware), 
telecommunications installations, recurring telecommunications, benefit 
card stock and equipment, supplies, printing and reproduction, travel, 
postage, Automated Clearinghouse and wire transfer fees, in addition to 
other direct costs.
    (iv) The State agency shall report the per case-month operating 
costs of the EBT and the coupon systems. Case-month costs shall be 
calculated by determining the average monthly issuance cost per system 
divided by the average monthly food stamp caseload issued benefits for 
the most recent four fiscal quarters or the most recent fiscal year. 
These costs shall be reported by function. The functions include: 
authorizing access to benefits; delivering benefits; crediting 
retailers; managing retailer participation; and reconciling and 
monitoring the issuance system. For each function the State agency shall 
report the information specified in paragraphs (c)(5)(iii) (A) and (B) 
of this section.
    (v) The State agency shall report benefit loss per case month. For 
coupon losses the State agency shall utilize data from Form FCS-250 Food 
Coupon Accountability Report, Form FCS-259 Food Stamp Mail Issuance 
Report, and Form FCS-46 Issuance Reconciliation Report. Data from actual 
EBT system losses shall be included as a separate line in the cost 
analysis report.
    (vi) EBT operational costs shall be measured after the EBT pilot 
project

[[Page 749]]

system has operated for a minimum of three months with the full caseload 
in the pilot area. The cost analysis shall be submitted to FCS after 
completion of the period of pilot operations with the full caseload.
    (vii) The State agency shall measure any residual coupon costs 
resulting from households within the demonstration site that have not 
been converted to EBT, households from outside of the site that shop at 
stores within the pilot project area; and households leaving the pilot 
project area. If the State agency proposes to operate EBT on less than a 
statewide basis for an indefinite period of time, costs for the combined 
coupon and EBT systems shall be reported and compared to the coupon 
system costs.
    (d) Expansion Requirements. After a minimum of three months of pilot 
project operation with the full pilot caseload, the State agency may 
decide to expand the EBT system. If expansion is selected, the State 
agency shall submit an APD Update to request FCS approval to implement 
and operate the EBT system in areas beyond the pilot area. The APD 
Update shall contain the following:
    (1) A proposed expansion budget for FCS' review and approval;
    (2) An Implementation Plan. At a minimum, the Expansion 
Implementation Plan shall address:
    (i) The requirements of paragraphs (c)(2)(vi) (A) through (D) of 
this section as applied to the expansion activities; and,
    (ii) The names, titles, addresses, and telephone numbers of the 
persons responsible for coordinating expansion activities;
    (3) A description of any necessary system design changes, including 
software modifications and/or modifications of equipment configurations. 
The design changes shall be documented within the ADP Update or provided 
to FCS for approval separately upon completion;
    (4) An assessment of the effects the EBT pilot project had, if any, 
on program participation during the pilot operation; and,
    (5) A revised Contingency Plan as required in paragraph (c)(7) of 
this section to address the expanded scope of the system.
    (e) Functional Requirements. The State agency shall ensure that the 
EBT system is capable of performing the following functional 
requirements prior to implementation:
    (1) Authorizing Household Benefits. (i) Issuing and replacing EBT 
cards to eligible households;
    (ii) Permitting eligible households to select a personal 
identification number (PINs) at least four digits in length;
    (iii) Establishing benefit cards and accounts with the central 
computer database;
    (iv) Maintaining the master household issuance record file data and 
current authorization information;
    (v) Training households and other users in system usage;
    (vi) Authorizing benefit delivery;
    (vii) Posting benefits to each household's account for regular and 
supplemental issuances;
    (viii) Providing households with access to information on benefit 
availability;
    (ix) Ensuring the privacy of household data and providing benefit 
and data security;
    (x) Inventorying and securing accountable documents; and
    (xi) Zeroing out benefit accounts and other account authorization 
activity.
    (2) Providing Food Benefits to Households. (i) Verifying the 
identity of authorized households or authorized household 
representatives at issuance terminals or POS;
    (ii) Verifying the PIN and/or PIN offset, primary account number 
(PAN), terminal identification number and retailer identification 
number;
    (iii) Determining the sufficiency of the household's account balance 
in order to debit or credit household benefit accounts at the point-of-
sale;
    (iv) Sending messages authorizing or rejecting purchases;
    (v) Providing back-up purchase procedures when the system is 
unavailable;
    (vi) Ensuring that benefits are available and carried over from 
month-to-month.
    (vii) Converting EBT benefits to coupons in accordance with 
paragraph (f)(6) of this section; and

[[Page 750]]

    (viii) Responding to issuance problems in a timely manner.
    (3) Crediting Retailers and Financial Institutions for Redeemed 
Benefits. (i) Verifying electronic transactions flowing to or from 
participating retailers' bank accounts;
    (ii) Creating and maintaining a file containing the individual 
records of EBT transactions;
    (iii) Totalling all credits accumulated by each retailer;
    (iv) Providing balance information to retailers or third party 
processors from individual POS terminals, as needed;
    (v) Providing each retailer information on total deposits in the 
system on a daily basis;
    (vi) Preparing a daily tape in a National Automated Clearinghouse 
format or other process approved by FCS with information on benefits 
redeemed for each retailer and in summary;
    (vii) Transmitting the automated clearinghouse (ACH) tape to a 
financial institution for transmission through the ACH or other method 
approved by FCS;
    (viii) Transferring the information on the ACH tape or other process 
approved by FCS containing daily redemption activity of each retailer to 
the FCS Minneapolis Computer Support Center at least once weekly. 
Transmittal may be by tape, disc, remote job entry or other means 
acceptable to FCS.
    (4) Managing Retailer Participation. The State agency shall:
    (i) Convey retailer authorization information provided by FCS to the 
system operator and follow up on actions taken regarding any 
disqualification or withdrawal by an authorized food retailer from the 
Food Stamp Program within two business days after receipt;
    (ii) Add newly authorized food retail stores or third party 
processors to the EBT system as prescribed under paragraph (g)(1)(ii) of 
this section.
    (iii) Ensure that only currently authorized retailers can access the 
system;
    (iv) Monitor food retailers to ensure that equipment deployment 
complies with paragraph (g)(4) of this section;
    (v) Ensure that equipment and supplies are maintained in working 
order for retail stores equipped by the State agency or its contractor. 
Equipment shall be replaced or repaired within 24 hours;
    (vi) Ensure that retail store employees are trained in system 
operation prior to implementation. Such training shall include the 
provision of appropriate written and program specific materials;
    (vii) Provide a mechanism for compliance investigations which 
permits authorized invetigators to have access to the system in order to 
conduct investigations of program abuse and alleged violations.
    (f) Household Participation--(1) Transaction Limits. No minimum 
dollar amount per transaction nor maximum limit on the number of 
transactions shall be established. In addition, no transaction fees 
shall be imposed on food stamp households utilizing the EBT system to 
access their benefits.
    (2) Access to Balances. Households shall be permitted to determine 
their food stamp account balances without making a purchase or standing 
in a checkout line. The State agency shall ensure that the EBT system is 
capable of providing a transaction history for a period of up two 
calendar months to households upon request.
    (3) Transaction Receipts. Households shall be provided printed 
receipts at the time of transaction. At a minimum this information 
shall:
    (i) State the date, merchant's name and location, transaction type, 
transaction amount and remaining balance for the food stamp account;
    (ii) Comply with the requirements of 12 CFR part 205 (Regulation E) 
in addition to the requirements of this section; and
    (iii) Identify the food stamp household member's account number (the 
PAN) or a coded transaction number. The household's name shall not 
appear on the receipt except when a signature is required when utilizing 
a manual transaction voucher.
    (4) Issuance of Benefits. State agencies shall establish an 
availability date for household access to their benefits and inform 
households of this date. The State agency may make adjustments to 
benefits posted to household accounts after the posting process is 
complete but prior to the availability date for household access in the 
event

[[Page 751]]

benefits are erroneously posted. The appropriate management controls and 
procedures for accessing benefit accounts after the posting shall be 
instituted to ensure that no unauthorized adjustments are made in 
accordance with paragraph (f)(7)(iii) of this section.
    (5) Issuance and Replacement of Cards or PINs. (i) The State agency 
shall permit food stamp households to select their Personal 
Identification Number (PIN). PIN assignment procedures shall not be 
permitted.
    (ii) The State agency shall replace EBT cards within two business 
days following notice by the household to the State agency. The State 
may request a waiver from the Department to allow a longer replacement 
time.
    (iii) The State agency shall ensure that a duplicate account is not 
established which would permit households to access more than one 
account in the system.
    (iv) An immediate hold shall be placed on accounts at the time 
notice is received from a household regarding the need for card or PIN 
replacement. The State agency shall implement a reporting system which 
is continually operative. Once a household reports that their EBT card 
has been lost or stolen, the State agency shall assume liability for 
benefits subsequently drawn from the account and replace any lost or 
stolen benefits to the household. The State agency or its agent shall 
maintain a record showing the date and time of all reports by households 
that their card is lost or stolen.
    (v) The State agency may impose a replacement fee with the approval 
of FCS. The fee shall not exceed the cost to replace the card. Any card 
replacement fee, the replacement threshold, frequency and circumstances 
to which the fee shall be applicable shall be identified when submitting 
the Advance Planning Document for FCS approval.
    (6) Benefit Conversion. (i) Households leaving an EBT project area 
must be able to convert their electronic benefits to coupons. At State 
agency option, a household entering an EBT area may be required to spend 
any remaining food coupons prior to utilizing the EBT system to access 
their benefits. Conversion shall occur within one business day following 
notice to the State agency by the household when inventories of food 
coupons are stored at local agency locations. Conversion shall occur 
within three business days if the State maintains coupon inventories in 
a central location.
    (ii) Requests for conversions to food coupons solely for purposes of 
shopping outside the pilot area shall be prohibited. However, the State 
agency may allow benefits in an EBT account to be converted to coupons 
for short-term absences from the EBT system area for family emergencies 
or similar isolated occurrences.
    (iii) Splitting food stamp benefits between food coupons and an 
electronic benefit access card at the time of issuance shall not be 
permitted.
    (iv) At State agency option, a limit may be imposed on the number of 
conversions per household that may occur annually for the purposes 
prescribed under paragraph (f)(6)(ii) of this section. A limit on 
conversions to food coupons shall not be imposed on households moving 
from the EBT area.
    (v) The State agency shall develop procedures for conversion 
whenever a household has left a State. These procedures shall not 
conflict with mailing restrictions regarding Authorization to 
Participate documents or other authorizing documents.
    (vi) The State agency shall round EBT benefits remaining in an 
account down to the nearest dollar amount suitable for coupon issuance. 
The State agency shall require the household to spend any remaining 
balance that cannot be converted to food coupons. If a household fails 
to spend the remaining benefits within one week after conversion occurs, 
the State agency shall expunge the benefits from the account and report 
the adjustment to the Department.
    (7) Stale Account Handling. Stale benefit accounts are those food 
stamp benefit accounts which are not accessed for three months or 
longer.
    (i) If EBT accounts are inactive for three months or longer, the 
State agency may store such benefits off-line.

[[Page 752]]

    (A) Benefits stored off-line shall be made available upon 
reapplication or re-contact by the household;
    (B) The State agency shall attempt to notify the household of this 
action before storage of the benefits off-line and describe the steps 
necessary to bring the benefits back on-line;
    (ii) The State agency shall expunge benefits that have not been 
accessed by the household after a period of one year. Issuance reports 
shall reflect the adjustment to the State agency issuance totals to 
comply with monthly issuance reporting requirements prescribed under 
Sec. 274.4 of this part.
    (iii) Procedures shall be established to permit the appropriate 
managers to adjust benefits that have already been posted to a benefit 
account prior to the household accessing the account; or, after an 
account has become dormant or the household has not used the funds which 
remain after conversion. These procedures shall be utilized if an 
account has been erroneously debited or credited. The procedures shall 
also be applicable to removing stale accounts for off-line storage of 
benefits or when the benefits are expunged. Whenever benefits are 
expunged or stored off-line, the State agency shall document the date, 
amount of the benefits and storage location in the household case file.
    (8) Timely Benefit Availability. The State agency shall ensure that 
the EBT system complies with the expedited service benefit delivery 
standard and the normal application processing standards prescribed by 
Sec. 273.2 and Sec. 274.2 of this chapter.
    (9) Access to Retail Stores. The EBT system shall provide for 
minimal disruption of access to and service in retail stores by eligible 
households. The EBT system shall not result in a significant increase in 
the cost of food or cost of transportation to authorized food retail 
stores for food stamp households. Checkout lanes equipped with POS 
devices shall be made available to Food Stamp households during all 
retail store hours of operation.
    (10) Household Training. The State agency shall provide training to 
each household prior to implementation and as needed during ongoing 
operation of the EBT system. Training functions for an EBT system may be 
incorporated into certification procedures. At a minimum, the household 
training shall include:
    (i) Content which will familiarize each household with the 
provisions of paragraphs (f)(1) through (f)(9) of this section;
    (ii) Hands-on experience for each household in the use of the EBT 
equipment necessary to access benefits and obtain balance information;
    (iii) Notification to the household of the procedures for manual 
transactions and re-presentation;
    (iv) The appropriate utilization and security of the Personal 
Identification Number;
    (v) Each household's responsibilities for reporting loss or damage 
to the EBT card and who to report them to, both during and outside 
business hours. Information on a 24 hour hotline telephone number shall 
be provided to each household during training;
    (vi) Written materials and/or other information, including the 
specific rights to benefits in an EBT system, shall be provided as 
prescribed under 7 CFR 272.4(b) for bilingual households and for 
households with disabilities. Written materials shall be prepared at an 
educational reading level suitable for food stamp households;
    (vii) Information on the signs or other appropriate indicators 
located in checkout lanes that enable the household to identify lanes 
equipped to accept EBT cards.
    (g) Retailer Participation. (1) All authorized retailers must be 
afforded the opportunity to participate in the EBT system. An authorized 
food retailer shall not be required to participate in an EBT system.
    (i) Retailers who do not have immediate access to telephones at the 
time of purchase shall be accommodated by an alternative system (e.g., 
manual vouchers with preliminary or delayed telephone verification) for 
redeeming food sales to eligible food stamp customers. These retailers 
include stationary food stores which opt to make home deliveries to food 
stamp households, house-to-house trade routes which operate on standing 
orders from customers, e.g. milk and bread delivery

[[Page 753]]

routes, food buying cooperatives authorized to participate as well as 
other food retailers authorized under Sec. 278.1 of this chapter. Prior 
to delivery or upon returning to the store, the retailer shall telephone 
the EBT central computer or hotline number to log the transaction and 
obtain an authorization number. If authorization cannot be obtained 
before or at the time of purchase, the retailer assumes the risk for 
sufficient benefits being available in the household's account. Any 
alternate method cannot be burdensome on either the household or the 
retailer, and it must include acceptable privacy and security features. 
Such systems shall only be available to retailers that cannot be 
equipped with a POS terminal at the time of sale.
    (ii) Newly authorized retailers shall have access to the EBT system 
within two weeks after the receipt of the FCS authorization notice. 
However, whenever a retailer chooses to employ a third party processor 
to drive its terminals or elects to drive its own terminals, access to 
the system shall be accomplished within a 30 day period or a mutually 
agreed upon time to enable the third party interface specifications and 
any State required functional certification to be performed by the State 
agency and/or its contractor. The FCS field office shall notify each new 
retailer at the time of application for authorization that an EBT system 
is operating in their store location(s). The field office shall also 
notify the State agency in a timely manner when a retailer is authorized 
to participate in the Food Stamp Program.
    (2) Authorized retailers shall not be required to pay costs 
essential to and directly attributable to EBT system operations as long 
as the equipment or services are provided by the State agency or its 
contractor and are utilized solely for the Food Stamp Program. In 
addition, if Food Stamp Program equipment is deployed under contract to 
the State agency, the State agency may, with USDA approval, share 
appropriate costs with retailers if the equipment is also utilized for 
commercial purposes.
    (3) The State agency shall ensure that a sufficient number of 
authorized food retailers have agreed to participate throughout the area 
in which the EBT system will operate to ensure that eligible food stamp 
households will not suffer a significant reduction in their choice of 
retail food stores and that a sufficient number of retail food stores 
serving minority language populations are participating.
    (4) The EBT system shall be implemented and operated in a manner 
that maintains equal treatment for food stamp households in accordance 
with Sec. 278.2(b) of this chapter. The following requirements for the 
equal treatment of food stamp households shall directly apply to EBT 
systems:
    (i) Retailers shall not establish special checkout lanes which are 
only for food stamp households or welfare customers. If special lanes 
are designated for the purpose of accepting other electronic debit or 
credit cards and/or other payment methods such as checks, food stamp 
customers with EBT cards may also be assigned to such lanes as long as 
other commercial customers are assigned there as well.
    (ii) POS terminals shall be deployed as follows in EBT systems 
requiring food stamp households to participate:
    (A) For an authorized food retail store with food stamp benefit 
redemption amounting to 15 percent or more of total food sales, all 
checkout lanes shall be equipped;
    (B) For an authorized food retail store with Food Stamp benefit 
redemptions representing less than 15 percent of total food sales, 
supermarkets shall, at a minimum, receive one terminal for every $11,000 
in monthly redemption activity up to the number of lanes per store. All 
other food retailers shall receive one terminal for every $8,000 in 
monthly redemption activity up to the number of lanes per store. 
However, a State agency may utilize an alternative deployment formula 
that permits equipment deployment at higher levels than required by this 
paragraph up to the number of lanes in each store. The State agency 
shall review terminal deployment on a yearly basis and shall be 
authorized to remove excess terminals if actual redemption activity 
warrants a reduction.
    (C) For newly authorized food retailers and authorized food 
retailers bordering the EBT system area, the State

[[Page 754]]

agency and food retailer shall negotiate a mutually agreed level of 
terminal deployment up to the number of lanes per store. The State 
agency may consult with the appropriate FCS field office in order to 
determine the previous food stamp redemption activity that could be 
utilized in determining the initial number of terminals to deploy in 
newly authorized retailers or border stores. The State agency shall 
examine household shopping patterns in the EBT operating area in order 
to establish the needs for border store equipment. Redemption 
information shall remain confidential.
    (D) Any food retailer shall be able to submit further evidence that 
it warrants additional terminals after the initial POS terminals are 
deployed. Food stamp households may also submit evidence to the State 
agency that additional POS terminals are needed.
    (5) The State agency shall ensure that the EBT system provides 
credits to the financial institution holding the accounts for retailers 
or third party processors within two business days of the daily cut-over 
period for retailer settlement. The cut-over period is the time of day 
established by the system in which a transaction day is established for 
settlement and reconciliation.
    (6) The State agency shall enter into an agreement with each 
authorized food retailer. The retailer agreement shall describe the 
terms and conditions of participation in the Food Stamp EBT system. At a 
minimum, the agreement shall:
    (i) Describe all terms and conditions with respect to equipment 
ownership, lease arrangements, handling and maintenance for which the 
State agency and merchant are liable;
    (ii) Describe the agreed upon procedures and policies for 
participation and withdrawal from the EBT system;
    (iii) Comply with all Food Stamp Program regulations with respect to 
retailer participation in the program and treatment of Food Stamp 
Program households. This shall include specific requirements with 
respect to the deployment of terminals and the identification of 
checkout lanes for food stamp customers;
    (iv) Delineate the liabilities during system downtime and the 
associated responsibilities of each party with respect to the use of 
off-line and/or manually entered data, paper vouchers, and re-presented 
vouchers.
    (h) Performance and Technical Standards. The State agency shall 
ensure that EBT systems comply with Point of Sale (POS) technical 
standards established by the American National Standards Institute 
(ANSI) or International Organization for Standardization (ISO) where 
applicable. In addition, the State agency shall ensure that the EBT 
system meets performance and technical standards in the areas of system 
processing speeds, system availability and reliability, system security, 
system ease-of-use, minimum card and terminal requirements, performance 
bonding, and a minimum transaction set. With prior written approval from 
FCS, the State agency may utilize the prevailing industry performance 
standards in its region in lieu of those identified in this section. The 
standards shall be included in all requests for proposals and contracts.
    (1) System Processing Speeds. (i) For leased line systems, 98 
percent of EBT transactions shall be processed within 10 seconds or less 
and all EBT transactions shall be processed within 15 seconds. Leased 
line systems rent telecommunications carriers specifically to connect to 
the central authorizing computer. For dial-up systems, 95 percent of the 
EBT transactions shall be processed within 15 seconds or less and all 
EBT transactions shall be processed within 20 seconds or less. Dial-up 
systems utilize existing telecommunications lines to dial up and connect 
to the central computer at the time of the transaction. Processing 
response time shall be measured at the POS terminal from the time the 
`enter' or `send' key is pressed to the receipt and display of 
authorization or disapproval information. Third party processors, as 
defined in paragraph (h)(5) of this section, shall be required by the 
State agency to comply with the same processing response times required 
of the primary processor.

[[Page 755]]

    (ii) The EBT system shall provide reports, as determined by the 
State agency, that document transaction processing response time and the 
number and type of problematic transactions that could not be processed 
within the standard response time.
    (2) System Availability and Reliability. (i) The EBT system central 
computer shall be available 99.9 percent of scheduled up-time, 24 hours 
a day, seven days per week. Scheduled up-time shall mean the time the 
database is available for transactions excluding scheduled downtime for 
routine maintenance. The total system, including the system's central 
computer, any network or intermediate processing facilities and 
cardholder authorization processors, shall be available 98 percent of 
scheduled up-time, 24 hours per day, 7 days per week. Scheduled downtime 
for routine maintenance shall occur during non-peak transaction periods. 
State certification procedures shall determine whether intermediate 
processing facilities and cardholder authorization processors are 
capable of complying with system availability standards prescribed 
herein prior to permitting the interface with the central computer 
system.
    (ii) The system central computer shall permit no more than 2 
inaccurate EBT transactions for every 10,000 EBT transactions processed. 
The transactions to be included in measuring system accuracy shall 
include all types of food stamp transactions permitted at POS terminals 
and processed through the host computer, manual transactions entered 
into the system, credits to household accounts, and funds transfers to 
retailer accounts.
    (iii) Reconciliation reports and other information regarding 
problematic transactions shall be made available to the State agency by 
the system operator, individual retailers, households or financial 
institutions as appropriate. Reports on problematic transactions, 
including inaccurate transactions shall be delineated by the source of 
the problem such as card failure, POS terminal failure, interruption of 
telecommunications, or other component failure. Errors shall be resolved 
in a timely manner.
    (3) System Security. As an addition to or component of the Security 
Program required of Automated Data Processing systems prescribed under 
Sec. 277.18(p) of this chapter, the State agency shall ensure that the 
following EBT security requirements are established:
    (i) Storage and control measures to control blank unissued EBT cards 
and PINs, and unused or spare POS devices;
    (ii) Measures to ensure communication access control. Communication 
controls shall include the transmission of transaction data and issuance 
information from point-of-sale terminals to work-stations and terminals 
at the data processing center. The following specific security measures 
shall be included, as appropriate, in the system design documentation, 
operating procedures or the State agency Security Program:
    (A) Computer hardware controls that ensure acceptance of data from 
authorized terminals only. These controls shall include the use of 
mechanisms such as retailer identification codes, terminal identifiers 
and user identification codes, and/or other mechanisms and procedures 
recognized by the industry;
    (B) Software controls, placed at either the terminal or central 
computer or both, that establish separate control files containing lists 
of authorized retailers, terminal identifying codes, and user access and 
identification codes. EBT system software controls shall include 
separate checks against the control files in order to validate each 
transaction prior to authorization and limiting the number of 
unsuccessful PIN attempts that can be made utilizing standard industry 
practices before the card is deactivated;
    (C) Communications network security that utilizes the Data 
Encryption Standard algorithm to encrypt the PIN, at a minimum, from the 
point of entry. Other security may include authentication codes and 
check-sum digits, in combination with data encoded on the magnetic 
stripe such as the PIN and/or PIN offset, to ensure data security during 
electronic transmission. Any of the network security measures may be 
utilized together or separately and may be applied at the terminal or 
central computer as indicated in the

[[Page 756]]

approved system design to ensure communications control;
    (D) Manual procedures that provide for secure access to the system 
with minimal risk to household or retailer accounts. Manual procedures 
may include the utilization of manager identification codes in obtaining 
telephonic authorization from the central computer system; requirements 
for separate entry with audio response unit verification and 
authorization number; and/or the utilization of 24 hour hotline 
telephone numbers to authorize transactions.
    (iii) Message validation shall include but shall not be limited to:
    (A) Message format checks for completeness of the message, correct 
order of data, existence of control characters, number and size of data 
fields and appropriate format standards as specified in the approved 
system design;
    (B) Range checks for acceptable date fields, number and valid 
account numbers, purchase and refund upper limitations in order to 
prevent and control damage to the system accounts;
    (C) Reversals of messages that are not fully processed and recorded.
    (iv) Administrative and operational procedures shall ensure that:
    (A) Functions affecting an account balance are separated or dually 
controlled during processing and when requesting Federal reimbursement 
through a concentrator bank under the provisions of paragraph (i) of 
this section. These functions may include but are not limited to the set 
up of accounts, transmittal of funds to and from accounts, access to 
files to change account records, and transmittal of retailer deposits to 
the ACH network or other means approved by FCS for crediting retailer 
bank accounts;
    (B) Passwords, identity codes or other security procedures must be 
utilized by State agency or local personnel and at data processing 
centers;
    (C) Software programming changes shall be dual controlled to the 
extent possible;
    (D) System operations functions shall be segregated from 
reconciliation duties;
    (v) A separate EBT security component shall be incorporated into the 
State agency Security Program for Automated Data Processing (ADP) 
systems where appropriate and as prescribed under Sec. 277.18(p) of this 
chapter. The periodic risk analyses required by the Security Program 
shall address the following items specific to an EBT system:
    (A) EBT system vulnerability to theft and unauthorized use;
    (B) Completeness and timeliness of the reconciliation system;
    (C) Vulnerability to tampering with or creating household accounts;
    (D) Erroneous posting of issuances to household accounts;
    (E) Manipulation of retailers' accounts such as creation of false 
transactions or intrusion by unauthorized computer users;
    (F) Capability to monitor systematic abuses at POS terminals such as 
debits for a complete allotment, excessive manual issuances, and 
multiple manual transactions at the same time. Such monitoring may be 
accomplished through the use of exception reporting;
    (G) Tampering with information on the ACH tape or similar 
information utilized in a crediting method approved by FCS; and,
    (H) The availability of a complete audit trail. A complete audit 
trail shall, at a minimum, be able to provide a complete transaction 
history of each individual system activity that affects an account 
balance. The audit trail shall include the tracking of issuances from 
the Master File and Issuance File, network transactions from point-of-
sale terminals to EBT central computer database and system file updates.
    (vi) The State agency shall incorporate the contingency plan 
approved by FCS prior to pilot implementation and subsequently updated 
as part of the Expansion Implementation Plan into the Security Program.
    (4) System Ease-of-Use. (i) For all system users, the State agency 
shall ensure that the system:
    (A) Minimizes the number of separate steps required to complete a 
transaction;
    (B) Minimizes the number of codes or commands needed to make use of 
the system;

[[Page 757]]

    (C) Makes available clear and comprehensive account balance 
information with a minimum number of actions necessary;
    (D) Provides training and instructions for all system users 
especially those persons with disabilities;
    (E) Makes available prompts on POS terminals or balance only 
terminals, where appropriate;
    (F) Identifies procedures for problem resolution;
    (G) Provides reasonable accommodation for the needs of households 
with disabilities in keeping with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 
1990.
    (ii) In addition to the requirements of paragraph (h)(4)(i) of this 
section, the State agency shall ensure that retailers utilizing the EBT 
system:
    (A) Have available manual backup procedures;
    (B) Can obtain timely information on daily credits to their banks;
    (C) Have available deposit information in a format readily 
comparable to information maintained in the store; and
    (D) Have available instructions on resolving problems with equipment 
and retailer accounts.
    (5) Third Party Processors. Third party processors are financial 
institutions, cardholder authorization processors other than the party 
with which the State agency has contracted for EBT services, and food 
retailers driving their own terminals that are capable of relaying 
electronic transactions to a central database computer for 
authorization. The State agency shall afford retailers the opportunity 
to use third party processors and shall provide interface specifications 
and certification standards in order for the third party processor to 
participate in the EBT system.
    (i) In order to participate in a Food Stamp Program EBT system, a 
third party processor must be able to meet all third party interface 
specifications and certification standards associated with this section. 
The State agency shall publish the third party interface specifications 
prior to implementation of the EBT system to enable third party 
processors to access the database. Third party processors shall undergo 
functional and acceptance tests as specified by the State agency;
    (ii) Third party processors shall be liable for transactions until 
the transaction has been electronically accepted by the contracted 
vendor or an intermediate processing facility;
    (iii) The State agency shall ensure that third party processors and 
food retailers driving their own terminals comply with this section and 
all applicable Food Stamp Program regulations.
    (6) Minimum Card Requirements. (i) The State agency shall ensure 
that the following information is printed on the card:
    (A) The address of the office where a card can be returned if found 
or no longer in use;
    (B) The statement of nondiscrimination which reads as follows: 
``This is an equal opportunity program. If you believe that you have 
been the victim of discrimination in your efforts to receive food stamp 
benefits because of your race, color, national origin, age, sex, 
disability, religious belief, or political beliefs, write immediately to 
the Administrator, Food and Consumer Service, 3101 Park Center Drive, 
Alexandria, Virginia 22302.'' In lieu of printing the required 
information on the EBT card, the State agency shall provide each 
household a card jacket or sleeve containing the nondiscrimination 
statement.
    (ii) FCS reserves the right to require State agencies to place a 
Department logo on the EBT card and/or sleeves or jackets.
    (iii) EBT cards and/or sleeves or jackets shall not contain the name 
of any State or local official. EBT informational materials shall not 
indicate association with any political party or other political 
affiliation.
    (7) POS Terminals. POS terminals shall meet the following 
requirements:
    (i) Balance information shall not be displayed on the screen of the 
POS terminal except for balance-only inquiry terminals;
    (ii) PINs shall not be displayed at the terminal; and
    (iii) PIN encryption shall occur from the point of entry in a manner 
which prevents the unsecured transmission between any point in the 
system.

[[Page 758]]

    (8) Performance Bonding. The State agency may require a performance 
bond in accordance with Sec. 277.8 of this chapter or utilize other 
contractual clauses it deems necessary to enforce the requirements of 
this section.
    (9) Minimum Transaction Set. At a minimum, the State agency shall 
ensure that the EBT system, including third party processors and 
retailers driving their own terminals, is capable of providing for 
authorizing or rejecting purchases, refunds or customer credits, voids 
or cancellations, key entered transactions, balance inquiries and 
settlement or close-out transactions.
    (i) Concentrator Bank Responsibilities. The concentrator bank shall 
be a Federally insured financial institution or other entity acceptable 
to the Federal Reserve which has the capability to take retailer credits 
and/or debits, obtained from the EBT system operator, and transmit them 
to the ACH network operated by the Federal Reserve or through another 
process for crediting retailers approved by FCS. Transmittal shall be by 
tape or on-line in a format suitable for the Automated Clearinghouse 
(ACH) or as approved by FCS.
    (1) The minimum functions of the concentrator bank are:
    (i) Preparing a daily ACH tape or other crediting process approved 
by FCS with information on benefits redeemed and creditable to each 
retailer;
    (ii) Transferring the ACH tape or other crediting process approved 
by FCS to the Federal Reserve or other entity approved by FCS;
    (iii) Initiating and accepting reimbursement from the appropriate 
U.S. Treasury account via the Payment Management System of the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) or other payment process 
approved by FCS. At the option of FCS, the State agency may designate 
another entity as the initiator of reimbursement for food stamp 
redemptions provided the entity is acceptable to FCS and HHS;
    (iv) Cooperating in the reconciliation of discrepancies and error 
resolution when necessary.
    (2) With the approval of FCS, another procedure, other than the ACH 
system, may be utilized to credit retailer accounts and/or debit FCS' 
account, if it meets the needs of FCS and the EBT system.
    (3) The State agency shall be liable for any errors in the creation 
of the ACH tape or its transmission. The State agency may transfer the 
liability associated with creation of the ACH tape, its transmission or 
another crediting process approved by FCS as appropriate to the EBT 
system operator or the concentrator bank. Appropriate system security 
administrative and operational procedures shall be instituted in 
accordance with paragraph (h)(3) of this section.
    (j) Reconciliation and Management Reporting. The EBT system shall 
provide reports and documentation pertaining to the following:
    (1) Reconciliation. Reconciliation shall be conducted and records 
kept as follows:
    (i) Reconciliation of benefits posted to household accounts on the 
central computer against benefits on the Issuance Authorization File;
    (ii) Reconciliation of individual household account balances against 
account activities on a daily basis;
    (iii) Reconciliation of each individual retail store's food stamp 
transactions per POS terminal and in total to deposits on a daily basis;
    (iv) Verification of retailer's credits against deposit information 
entered into the ACH network;
    (v) Reconciliation of total funds entered into, exiting from, and 
remaining in the system each day;
    (vi) Maintenance of audit trails that document the full cycle of 
issuance from benefit allotment posting to the State issuance 
authorization file through posting to point-of-sale transactions at 
retailers through settlement of retailer credits.
    (2) Management Reports. The State agency shall require the EBT 
system to provide reports that enable the State agency to manage the 
system. The reports shall be available to the State agency or FCS as 
requested on a timely basis and consist of:
    (i) Information on how the system operates relative to its 
performance standards, the incidence, type and cause of system problems, 
and utilization patterns.

[[Page 759]]

    (ii) Information regarding transactions and other information 
specified by FCS during system development which is necessary to conduct 
compliance investigations. At a minimum exception reports shall be able 
to isolate transaction data by individual retailers and households. 
Exception reports shall be provided to the appropriate FCS Compliance 
Branch Area office on a quarterly basis. The Compliance Officer in 
Charge (COIC) shall be permitted to require that the reports be made 
available on either a more or less frequent basis.
    (3) Pilot Project Reports. The State agency shall provide quarterly 
reports as described in paragraph (c)(4) of this section during the 
pilot project.
    (4) Program Reporting. When benefits are initially issued through an 
EBT system, the State agency shall report as required by FCS in 
Sec. 274.4 and in accordance with the FCS instructions specific to EBT 
issuances.
    (k) Federal Financial Participation. (1) The cost of administering 
statewide benefit issuance after implementation of the EBT system shall 
be funded at the regular Federal financial participation rate up to the 
level of the current coupon issuance costs, as prescribed in paragraph 
(c)(3) of this section.
    (2) The State agency may request enhanced funding for the 
development of EBT systems which are components of complete automated 
data processing systems to be developed in accordance with the 
provisions of 7 CFR 277.18(g). To be eligible for enhanced funding, the 
EBT system must be fully integrated with the complete ADP system.
    (3) Enhanced funding for coupon issuance activities that a State 
agency incurs on Indian Reservations and the enhanced funding provided 
in accordance with this paragraph for development of an EBT system shall 
be accommodated within the issuance cap.
    (4) The State agency shall comply with the provisions set forth 
under 7 CFR 277.18 and appendix A of 7 CFR 277.18 in determining and 
claiming allowable costs for the EBT system.
    (5) Access to system documentation, including cost records of 
contractors or subcontractors shall be made available and incorporated 
into contractual agreements in accordance with Sec. 277.18(k) of this 
chapter.
    (6) The State agency shall adjust the issuance cap, once the cap is 
approved by FCS, as follows:
    (i) The food stamp case load utilized in estimating annual budgetary 
needs under the cap shall be adjusted quarterly by the number of cases 
actually issued benefits through the EBT system and the coupon issuance 
systems operating within the State. Quarterly costs adjusted by the 
number of food stamp cases actually issued benefits during the quarter 
shall accumulate by each Federal fiscal quarter until the close of the 
fiscal period to which it applies;
    (ii) The annual issuance cap adjustment shall be based on the 
percentage change in the Gross National Product Implicit Price Deflator 
index (GNP price deflator). The index is reported monthly by the U.S. 
Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. The percentage 
change shall be calculated from the percentage change in the index 
between the first quarter of the current calendar year and the first 
quarter of the previous year. This data will be made available to State 
agencies by FCS from the June report published by the Bureau of Economic 
Analysis. The case-month cap for subsequent Federal fiscal years shall 
be obtained by revising the previous year's cap based on the most recent 
inflation information for that period. The State agency shall then 
multiply the revised issuance cap from the prior year by the percentage 
change in inflation indicated by the most recent GNP price deflator;
    (iii) The yearly amortized cost associated with pre-operational 
costs (i.e., design, development) shall be determined at the end of the 
assignment period established in accordance with paragraph (c)(3)(iv) of 
this section and assigned retroactively to the case-month costs of each 
prior year of operation. If such assignment puts the State agency over 
the issuance cap of all prior years of operation, claims shall be made 
as appropriate.
    (l) Re-presentation. The State agency shall ensure that a manual 
purchase system is available for use during

[[Page 760]]

times when the EBT system is inaccessible.
    (1) Under certain circumstances, when a manual transaction occurs 
due to the inaccessibility of the host computer and the transaction is 
rejected because insufficient funds are available in a household's 
account, the State agency may permit the re-presentation of the 
transaction during subsequent months. At the State agency's option, re-
presentation may be permitted within the EBT system as follows:
    (i) Re-presentation of manual vouchers when there are insufficient 
funds in the EBT account to cover the manual transaction may be 
permitted only under the following circumstances:
    (A) The manual transaction occurred because the host computer was 
down and authorization was obtained by the retailer for the transaction; 
or
    (B) The manual transaction occurred because telephone lines were 
down.
    (ii) Re-presentation of manual vouchers shall not be permitted when 
the EBT card, magnetic stripe, PIN pad, card reader, or POS terminal 
fails and telephone lines are operational. Manual transactions shall not 
be utilized to extend credit to a household via re-presentation when the 
household's account balance is insufficient to cover the planned 
purchase.
    (iii) The State agency may debit the benefit allotment of a 
household during the first month following the insufficient funds 
transaction in the amount of $50. If the monthly allotment is less than 
$50, the State shall debit the account for $10. For each subsequent 
month, the deduction from the monthly allotment shall be the greater of 
$10 or 10 percent until the re-presentation is completely repaid.
    (2) The State agency shall establish procedures for determining the 
validity of each re-presentation and subsequent procedures authorizing a 
debit from a household's monthly benefit allotment. The State agency may 
ask households to voluntarily pay the amount of a re-presented 
transaction or arrange for a faster schedule of payment than identified 
in paragraph (l)(1)(iii) of this section.
    (3) The State agency shall ensure that retailers provide notice to 
households at the time of the manual transaction that re-presentation 
may occur if there are insufficient benefits in the account to cover the 
transaction. The statement shall be printed on the paper voucher or on a 
separate sheet of paper. The State agency shall also provide notice to 
the household prior to the month when a benefit allotment is reduced 
when a re-presentation is necessary. Notice shall be provided to the 
household for each insufficient transaction that is to be re-presented 
in a future month. The notice shall be provided prior to the month it 
occurs and shall state the amount of the reduction in the benefit 
allotment.
    (4) The Department shall not accept liability under any 
circumstances for the overissuance of benefits due to the utilization of 
manual vouchers, including those situations when the host computer is 
inaccessible or telecommunications lines are not functioning. However, 
the State agency, in consultation with authorized retailers and with the 
mutual agreement of the State agency's vendor, if any, may accept 
liability for manual purchases within a specified dollar limit. Costs 
associated with liabilities accepted by the State agency shall not be 
reimbursable.
    (5) The State agency shall be strictly liable for manual 
transactions that result in excess deductions from a household's 
account.
    (m) Ownership Rights and Procurement Requirements. (1) The State 
agency shall comply with the software and automated data processing 
equipment ownership rights prescribed under Sec. 277.13 and 
Sec. 277.18(l) of this chapter.
    (2) The State agency shall comply with the procurement standards 
prescribed under Sec. 277.18(j) of this chapter. Under service 
agreements, the procurement of equipment and services which will be 
utilized in a Food Stamp EBT system shall be conducted in accordance 
with the provisions set forth under Sec. 277.18(f) of this chapter.

[57 FR 11249, Apr. 1, 1992; 57 FR 44791, Sept. 29, 1992]

[[Page 761]]


<R03>
PART 275--PERFORMANCE REPORTING SYSTEM--Table of Contents

<R05>


                        Subpart A--Administration

Sec.
275.1  General scope and purpose.
275.2  State agency responsibilities.
275.3  Federal monitoring.
275.4  Record retention.

              Subpart B--Management Evaluation (ME) Reviews

275.5  Scope and purpose.
275.6  Management units.
275.7  Selection of sub-units for review.
275.8  Review coverage.
275.9  Review process.

                 Subpart C--Quality Control (QC) Reviews

275.10  Scope and purpose.
275.11  Sampling.
275.12  Review of active cases.
275.13  Review of negative cases.
275.14  Review processing.

                 Subpart D--Data Analysis and Evaluation

275.15  Data management.

                      Subpart E--Corrective Action

275.16  Corrective action planning.
275.17  State corrective action plan.
275.18  Project area/management unit corrective action plan.
275.19  Monitoring and evaluation.

    Subpart F--Responsibilities for Reporting on Program Performance

275.20  ME review schedules.
275.21  Quality control review reports.
275.22  Administrative procedure.

                     Subpart G--Program Performance

275.23  Determination of State agency program performance.

    Authority: 7 U.S.C. 2011-2032.

    Editorial Note: OMB control numbers relating to this part 275 are 
contained in Sec. 271.8.


<R04>
                        Subpart A--Administration


<R05>
Sec. 275.1  General scope and purpose.

    (a) Under the Food Stamp Act, each State agency is responsible for 
the administration of the Food Stamp Program in accordance with the Act, 
Regulations, and the State agency's plan of operation. To fulfill the 
requirements of the Act, each State agency shall have a system for 
monitoring and improving its administration of the program. The State 
agency is also responsible for reporting on its administration to FCS. 
These reports shall identify program deficiencies and the specific 
administrative action proposed to meet the program requirements 
established by the Secretary. If it is determined, however, that a State 
has failed without good cause to meet any of the program requirements 
established by the Secretary, or has failed to carry out the approved 
State plan of operation, the Department shall suspend and/or disallow 
from the State such funds as are determined to be appropriate in 
accordance with part 276 of this chapter.
    (b)(1) The Food Stamp Act authorizes the Secretary to pay each State 
agency an amount equal to 50 percent of all administrative costs 
involved in each State agency's operation of the program. The Act 
further authorizes the Secretary to increase the percentage share if:
    (i) The State agency's payment error rate is less than or equal to 
5.90 percent, and
    (ii) The State agency's negative case error rate is less than the 
national weighted mean negative case error rate for the prior fiscal 
year.
    (2) If a State agency qualifies for an increased percentage share, 
the amount of increase will be an additional percentage point for each 
full tenth of a percentage point by which the payment error rate is less 
than six percent, up to a maximum of 60 percent of administrative costs. 
Those State agencies not receiving the increased share of funding shall 
develop and implement corrective action plans to reduce payment errors. 
Corrective action shall be completed as required in subpart E of this 
section.

[Amdt. 160, 45 FR 15898, Mar. 11, 1980, as amended by Amdt. 266, 52 FR 
3407, Feb. 4, 1987; Amdt. 328, 56 FR 60051, Nov. 27, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 275.2  State agency responsibilities.

    (a) Establishment of the performance reporting system. (1) The State 
agency shall establish a continuing performance reporting system to 
monitor program administration and program operations. The method for 
establishing

[[Page 762]]

each component of the system is identified and explained in subparts B 
through F of this part. The components of the State agency's performance 
reporting system shall be:
    (i) Data collection through management evaluation (ME) reviews and 
quality control (QC) reviews;
    (ii) Analysis and evaluation of data from all sources;
    (iii) Corrective action planning;
    (iv) Corrective action implementation and monitoring; and
    (v) Reporting to FCS on program performance.
    (2) The State agency must ensure corrective action is effected at 
the State and project area levels.
    (b) Staffing standards. The State agency shall employ sufficient 
State level staff to perform all aspects of the Performance Reporting 
System as required in this part of the regulations. The staff used to 
conduct QC reviews shall not have prior knowledge of either the 
household or the decision under review. Where there is prior knowledge, 
the reviewer must disqualify her/himself. Prior knowledge is defined as 
having:
    (1) Taken any part in the decision that has been made in the case; 
(2) any discussion of the case with staff who participated in the 
decision; or (3) any personal knowledge of or acquaintance with persons 
in the case itself. To ensure no prior knowledge on the part of QC or ME 
reviewers, local project area staff shall not be used to conduct QC or 
ME reviews; exceptions to this requirement concerning local level staff 
may be granted with prior approval from FCS. However, local personnel 
shall not, under any circumstances, participate in ME reviews of their 
own project areas.

[Amdt. 160, 45 FR 15898, Mar. 11, 1980, as amended by Amdt. 266, 52 FR 
3407, Feb. 4, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 275.3  Federal monitoring.

    The Food and Consumer Service shall conduct the review described in 
this section to determine whether a State agency is operating the Food 
Stamp Program and the Performance Reporting System in accordance with 
program requirements. The Federal reviewer may consolidate the 
scheduling and conduct of these reviews to reduce the frequency of entry 
into the State agency. FCS regional offices will conduct additional 
reviews to examine State agency and project area operations, as 
considered necessary to determine compliance with program requirements. 
FCS shall notify the State agency of any deficiencies detected in 
program or system operations. Any deficiencies detected in program or 
system operations which do not necessitate long range analytical and 
evaluative measures for corrective action development shall be 
immediately corrected by the State agency. Within 60 days of receipt of 
the findings of each review established below, State agencies shall 
develop corrective action addressing all other deficiencies detected in 
either program or system operations and shall ensure that the State 
agency's own corrective action plan is amended and that FCS is provided 
this information at the time of the next formal semiannual update to the 
State agency's Corrective Action Plan, as required in Sec. 275.17.
    (a) Reviews of State Agency's Administration/Operation of the Food 
Stamp Program. FCS shall conduct an annual review of certain functions 
performed at the State agency level in the administration/operation of 
the program. FCS will designate specific areas required to be reviewed 
each fiscal year.
    (b) Reviews of State Agency's Management Evaluation System. FCS will 
review each State agency's management evaluation system on a biennial 
basis; however, FCS may review a State agency's management evaluation 
system on a more frequent basis if a regular review reveals serious 
deficiencies in the ME system. The ME review will include but not be 
limited to a determination of whether or not the State agency is 
complying with FCS regulations, an assessment of the State agency's 
methods and procedures for conducting ME reviews, and an assessment of 
the data collected by the State agency in conducting the reviews.
    (c) Validation of State Agency error rates. FCS shall validate each 
State agency's payment error rate and underissuance error rate, as 
described in Sec. 275.23(c), during each annual quality

[[Page 763]]

control review period. Federal validation reviews shall be conducted by 
reviewing against the Food Stamp Act and the regulations, taking into 
account any FCS-authorized waivers to deviate from specific regulatory 
provisions. FCS shall validate the State agency's negative case error 
rate, as described in Sec. 275.23(d), only when the State agency's 
payment and underissuance error rates for an annual review period appear 
to entitle it to an increased share of Federal administrative funding 
for that period as outlined in Sec. 277.4(b)(2), and its reported 
negative case error rate for that period is less than the national 
weighted mean negative case error rate for the prior fiscal year. Any 
deficiencies detected in a State agency's QC system shall be included in 
the State agency's corrective action plan. The findings of validation 
reviews shall be used as outlined in Sec. 275.23(e)(6).
    (1) Payment error rate. The validation review of each State agency's 
payment error rate shall consist of the following actions:
    (i) FCS will select a subsample of a State agency's completed active 
cases. The Federal review sample for completed active cases is 
determined as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
   State annual active case sample size      Federal annual sample size 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
1,200 and over............................  n=400.                      
300-1,199.................................  n=150+0.277 (N-300).        
Under 300.................................  n=150                       
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (A) In the above formula, n is the minimum number of Federal review 
sample cases which must be selected when conducting a validation review, 
except that FCS may select a lower number of sample cases if:
    (1) The State agency does not report a change in sampling procedures 
associated with a revision in its required sample size within 10 days of 
effecting the change; and/or
    (2) The State agency does not complete the number of case reviews 
specified in its approved sampling plan.
    (B) The reduction in the number of Federal cases selected will be 
equal to the number of cases that would have been selected had the 
Federal sampling interval been applied to the State agency's shortfall 
in its required sample size. This number may not be exact due to random 
starts and rounding.
    (C) In the above formula, N is the State agency's minimum active 
case sample size as determined in accordance with Sec. 275.11(b)(1).
    (ii) FCS Regional Offices will conduct case record reviews to the 
extent necessary to determine the accuracy of the State agency's 
findings using the household's certification records and the State 
agency's QC records as the basis of determination. The FCS Regional 
Office may choose to verify any aspects of a State agency's QC findings 
through telephone interviews with participants or collateral contacts. 
In addition, the FCS Regional Office may choose to conduct field 
investigations to the extent necessary.
    (iii) FCS Regional Offices will assist State agencies in completing 
active cases reported as not complete due to household refusal to 
cooperate.
    (iv) FCS will also review the State agency's sampling procedures, 
estimation procedures, and the State agency's system for data management 
to ensure compliance with Sec. 275.11 and Sec. 275.12.
    (v) FCS validation reviews of the State agency's active sample cases 
will be conducted on an ongoing basis as the State agency reports the 
findings for individual cases and supplies the necessary case records. 
FCS will begin the remainder of each State agency's validation review as 
soon as possible after the State agency has supplied the necessary 
information regarding its sample and review activity.
    (2) Underissuance error rate. The validation review of each State 
agency's underissuance error rate shall occur as a result of the Federal 
validation of the State agency's payment error rate as outlined in 
paragraph (c)(1) of this section.
    (3) Negative case error rate. The validation review of each State 
agency's negative case error rate shall consist of the following 
actions:
    (i) FCS will select a subsample of a State agency's completed 
negative cases. The Federal review sample for completed negative cases 
is determined as follows:

[[Page 764]]



------------------------------------------------------------------------
  State annual negative case sample size     Federal annual sample size 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
800 and over..............................  n=160.                      
150-799...................................  n=75 + 0.130 (N-150).       
Under 150.................................  n=75.                       
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (A) In the above formula, n is the minimum number of Federal review 
sample cases which must be selected when conducting a validation review, 
except that FCS may select a lower number of sample cases if:
    (1) The State agency does not report a change in sampling procedures 
associated with a revision in its required sample size within 10 days of 
effecting the change; and/or
    (2) The State agency does not complete the number of case reviews 
specified in its approved sampling plan.
    (B) The reduction in the number of Federal cases selected will be 
equal to the number of cases that would have been selected had the 
Federal sampling interval been applied to the State agency's shortfall 
in its required sample size. This number may not be exact due to random 
starts and rounding.
    (C) In the above formula, N is the State agency's minimum negative 
case sample size as determined in accordance with Sec. 275.11(b)(2).
    (ii) FCS Regional Offices will conduct case record reviews to the 
extent necessary to determine whether the household case record 
contained sufficient documentation to justify the State agency's QC 
findings of the correctness of the State agency's decision to deny or 
terminate a household's participation.
    (iii) FCS will also review each State agency's negative case 
sampling and review procedures against the provisions of Secs. 275.11 
and 275.13.
    (iv) FCS will begin each State agency's negative sample case 
validation review as soon as possible after the State agency has 
supplied the necessary information, including case records and 
information regarding its sample and review activity.
    (4) Arbitration. Whenever the State agency disagrees with the FCS 
regional office concerning individual QC case findings and the 
appropriateness of actions taken to dispose of an individual case, the 
State agency may request that the dispute be arbitrated on a case-by-
case basis. The arbitration review shall be limited to the point(s) 
within the Federal findings that the State agency disputes. However, if 
the arbitrator in the course of the review discovers a mathematical 
error in the computation sheet, the arbitrator shall correct the error 
while calculating the allotment. There are two levels of FCS 
arbitration.
    (i) Regional level. The first level of arbitration is the FCS 
regional office. The regional arbitrator shall be an individual who is 
not directly involved in the validation effort.
    (A) The State agency shall request regional office arbitration 
within 28 calendar days of the date of receipt by the State agency of 
the regional office case findings. In the event the last day of this 
time period falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or Federal or State holiday, 
the period runs to the end of the next work day.
    (B) Full documentation of the case and the policy(s) in question 
should be submitted with the request for arbitration. However, the State 
agency may submit additional documentation, provided it can do so within 
the 28 days allowed in Sec. 275.3(c)(4)(i)(A). Further, the State agency 
has 15 days from the date of receipt of a request to submit any 
additional information requested by the arbitrator. The regional 
arbitrator shall only consider information submitted after the 28-day 
timeframe has ended if it is submitted in response to the arbitrator's 
request and it is received within the 15-day timeframe.
    (C) The regional arbitrator shall have 30 days to review the case 
and make a decision or to notify the State agency of the status of the 
case. If the arbitrator requests additional information from the State 
agency, this 30-day timeframe shall be suspended from the date the 
arbitrator requests the additional information until the information is 
received or the State's time period for submittal in 
Sec. 275.3(c)(4)(i)(B) has expired.
    (D) The State agency shall have until June 18, 1990, to request 
regional arbitration of regional office case findings which the State 
received before February 22, 1988.
    (ii) National level. The second level of arbitration is the FCS 
national office. The Deputy Administrator for Family

[[Page 765]]

Nutrition Programs shall designate the national arbitrator.
    (A) The State agency shall request national office arbitration 
within 28 calendar days of the date of receipt by the State agency of 
the regional arbitrator's decision. In the event the last day of this 
time period falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or Federal or State holiday, 
the period runs to the end of the next work day.
    (B) The state agency shall submit the case directly to the national 
arbitrator. Full documentation of the case and the policy(s) in question 
should be submitted with the request for arbitration. However, the State 
agency may submit additional documentation, provided it can do so within 
the 28 days allowed in Sec. 275.3(c)(4)(ii)(A). Further, the State 
agency has 15 days from the date of receipt of a request to submit any 
additional information requested by the arbitrator. The national 
arbitrator shall only consider information submitted after the 28 day 
timeframe has ended if it is submitted in response to the arbitrator's 
request and it is received within the 15-day timeframe.
    (C) The State agency shall have until June 18, 1990, to request 
national office arbitration of regional arbitration decisions which the 
State agency received before February 22, 1988.
    (5) Household cooperation. Households are required to cooperate with 
Federal QC reviewers. Refusal to cooperate shall result in termination 
of the household's eligibility. The Federal reviewer shall follow the 
procedures in Sec. 275.12(g)(1)(ii) in order to determine whether a 
household is refusing to cooperate with the Federal QC reviewer. If the 
Federal reviewer determines that the household has refused to cooperate, 
as opposed to failed to cooperate, the household shall be reported to 
the State agency for termination of eligibility.
    (d) Assessment of Corrective Action. (1) FCS will conduct will 
conduct a comprehensive annual assessment of a State agency's corrective 
action process by compiling all information relative to that State 
agency's corrective action efforts, including the State agency's system 
for data analysis and evaluation. The purpose of this assessment and 
review is to determine if: identified deficiencies are analyzed in terms 
of causes and magnitude and are properly included in either the State or 
Project Area/Management Unit corrective action plan; the State agency is 
implementing corrective actions according to the appropriate plan; 
target completion dates for reduction or elimination of deficiencies are 
being met; and, corrective actions are effective. In addition, FCS will 
examine the State agency's corrective action monitoring and evaluative 
efforts. The assessment of corrective action will be conducted at the 
State agency, project area, and local level offices, as necessary.
    (2) In addition, FCS will conduct on-site reviews of selected 
corrective actions as frequently as considered necessary to ensure that 
State agencies are implementing proposed corrective actions within the 
timeframes specified in the State agency and/or Project Area/Management 
Unit corrective action plans and to determine the effectiveness of the 
corrective action. The on-site reviews will provide State agencies and 
FCS with a mechanism for early detection of problems in the corrective 
action process to minimize losses to the program, participants, or 
potential participants.

[Amdt. 160, 45 FR 15898, Mar. 11, 1980, as amended by Amdt. 237, 47 FR 
57669, Dec. 28, 1982; Amdt. 260, 49 FR 6303, Feb. 17, 1984; Amdt. 266, 
52 FR 3407, Feb. 4, 1987; 53 FR 1604, Jan. 21, 1988; 54 FR 23951, June 
5, 1989; Amdt. 309, 55 FR 1672, Jan. 18, 1990; Amdt. 328, 56 FR 60051, 
Nov. 27, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 275.4  Record retention.

    (a) The State agency shall maintain Performance Reporting System 
records to permit ready access to, and use of, these records. 
Performance Reporting System records include information used in data 
analysis and evalution, corrective action plans, corrective action 
monitoring records in addition to ME review records and QC review 
records as explained in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section. To be 
readily accessible, system records shall be retained and filed in an 
orderly fashion. Precautions should be taken to ensure that these 
records are retained without loss or destruction for the 3-year period

[[Page 766]]

required by these regulations. Information obtained on individual 
households for Performance Reporting System purposes shall be 
safeguarded in accordance with FCS policies on disclosure of information 
for the Food Stamp Program.
    (b) ME review records consist of thorough documentation of review 
findings, sources from which information was obtained, procedures used 
to review Food Stamp Program requirements including sampling techniques 
and lists, and ME review plans. The State agency must submit documented 
evidence of review findings to the FCS Regional Office upon request for 
purposes of evaluating State corrective action plans.
    (c) QC review records consist of Forms FCS-380, Worksheet for 
Integrated AFDC, Food Stamps and Medicaid Quality Control Reviews, FCS-
380-1, Integrated Review Schedule, FCS-245, Negative Quality Control 
Review Schedule, and Form FCS-248, Status of Sample Selection and 
Completion; other materials supporting the review decision; sample 
lists; sampling frames; tabulation sheets; and reports of the results of 
all quality control reviews during each review period.

[Amdt. 160, 45 FR 15898, Mar. 11, 1980, as amended by Amdt. 260, 49 FR 
6304, Feb. 17, 1984; Amdt. 262, 49 FR 50597, Dec. 31, 1984]


<R04>
              Subpart B--Management Evaluation (ME) Reviews


<R05>
Sec. 275.5  Scope and purpose.

    (a) Objectives. Each State agency shall ensure that project areas 
operate the Food Stamp Program in accordance with the Act, regulations, 
and FCS-approved State Plan of Operation. To ensure compliance with 
program requirements, ME reviews shall be conducted to measure 
compliance with the provisions of FCS regulations. The objectives of an 
ME review are to:
    (1) Provide a systematic method of monitoring and assessing program 
operations in the project areas;
    (2) Provide a basis for project areas to improve and strengthen 
program operations by identifying and correcting deficiencies; and
    (3) Provide a continuing flow of information between the project 
areas, the States, and FCS, necessary to develop the solutions to 
problems in program policy and procedures.
    (b) Frequency of review. (1) State agencies shall conduct a review 
once every year for large project areas, once every two years for medium 
project areas, and once every three years for small project areas, 
unless an alternate schedule is approved by FCS. The most current and 
accurate information on active monthly caseload available at the time 
the review schedule is developed shall be used to determine project area 
size.
    (2) A request for an alternate review schedule shall be submitted 
for approval in writing with a proposed schedule and justification. In 
any alternate schedule, each project area must be reviewed at least once 
every three years. Approval of an alternate schedule is dependent upon a 
State agency's justification that the project areas that will be 
reviewed less frequently than required in paragraph (b)(1) of this 
section are performing adequately and that previous reviews indicate few 
problems or that known problems have been corrected. FCS retains the 
authority for approving any alternate schedule and may approve a 
schedule in whole or in part. Until FCS approval of an alternate 
schedule is obtained, the State agency shall conduct reviews in 
accordance with paragraph (b)(1) of this section.
    (3) FCS may require the State agency to conduct additional on-site 
reviews when a serious problem is detected in a project area which could 
result in a substantial dollar or service loss.
    (4) State agencies shall also establish a system for monitoring 
those project areas' operations which experience a significant influx of 
migratory workers during such migrations. This requirement may be 
satisfied by either scheduling ME reviews to coincide with such 
migrations or by conducting special reviews. As part of the review the 
State agency shall contact local migrant councils, advocate groups, or 
other organizations in the project area to ensure that migrants are 
receiving the required services.

[Amdt. 160, 45 FR 15900, Mar. 11, 1980, as amended by Amdt. 262, 49 FR 
50597, Dec. 31, 1984; Amdt. 266, 52 FR 3408, Feb. 4, 1987]

[[Page 767]]


<R05>
Sec. 275.6  Management units.

    (a) Establishment of management units. For the purpose of ME 
reviews, State agencies may, subject to FCS approval, establish 
``management units'' which are different from project areas designated 
by FCS for participation in the program. For example, State-established 
welfare districts, regions or other administrative structures within a 
State may be so designated. Management units can be designated as either 
large, medium, or small for purposes of frequency of review. However, 
establishment of management units solely for the purpose of reducing the 
frequency of review will not be approved by FCS.
    (b) FCS approval of management units. State agencies shall submit 
requests for establishment of management units to FCS, which shall have 
final authority for approval of such units as well as any changes in 
those previously approved by FCS.
    (1) The following minimum criteria must be met prior to requesting 
FCS approval:
    (i) The proposed management unit must correspond with existing 
State-established welfare districts, regions, or other administrative 
structures; and
    (ii) The unit must have supervisory control over Food Stamp Program 
operations within that geographic area and have authority for 
implementation of corrective action.
    (2) In submitting the request for FCS approval, the State agency 
shall include the following information regarding the proposed 
management unit:
    (i) That the proposed management unit meets the minimum criteria 
described in paragraphs (b)(1) (i) and (ii) of this section;
    (ii) Geographic coverage, including the names of the counties/
project areas within the unit and the identification (district or region 
number) and location (city) of the office which has supervisory control 
over the management unit;
    (iii) Food Stamp Program participation, including the number of 
persons and number of households;
    (iv) The number of certification offices;
    (v) The number of issuance units;
    (vi) The dollar value of allotments issued as reflected in the most 
recent available data; and
    (vii) Any other relevant information.

[Amdt. 160, 45 FR 15900, Mar. 11, 1980; 45 FR 23637, Apr. 8, 1980, as 
amended by Amdt. 266, 52 FR 3408, Feb. 4, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 275.7  Selection of sub-units for review.

    (a) Definition of sub-units. Sub-units are the physical locations of 
organizational entities within project areas responsible for operating 
various aspects of the Food Stamp Program, exclusive of Post Offices 
which may issue coupons. Sub-units shall be classified based upon 
functional responsibility as one or more of the following.
    (1) Certification office. Any sub-unit which has the responsibility 
for accepting applications, conducting interviews, determining 
eligibility, maintaining (or having easy access to) casefiles, and 
transmitting information to the data management unit shall be designated 
as a certification office.
    (2) Issuance office. Any sub-unit which has the responsibility for 
issuing coupons to participating households and storing coupons shall be 
designated as an issuance office.
    (3) Data management unit (DMU). Any sub-unit which has the 
responsibility for maintaining the household issuance record (HIR) 
masterfile shall be designated as a DMU.
    (4) Bulk storage point. Any sub-unit which has the responsibility 
for accepting and storing supplies of coupons prior to shipment to 
issuance sites shall be designated as a bulk storage point.
    (5) Reporting point. Any sub-unit which has the responsibility for 
preparation and submittal of Form FCS-250 for more than one issuance 
unit shall be designated as a reporting point, regardless of whether or 
not the unit actually issues coupons.
    (b) Reviewing Issuance Offices and Bulk Storage Points. The issuance 
office and bulk storage point review required by Sec. 274.1(c)(2) of 
this chapter may be satisfied through the ME review system.
    (c) Combined responsibilities. (1) When a sub-unit has more than one 
of the

[[Page 768]]

areas of functional responsibility specified in paragraph (a) of this 
section, it shall be included in each applicable classification and if 
selected for review, all functions performed shall be examined. For 
example, if a sub-unit has an organizational entity which certifies 
households and also has an entity which regularly issues coupons, the 
sub-unit shall be designated as both a certification and an issuance 
office. Thus, in an HIR issuance system, sub-units designated as 
issuance offices would usually also be designated as DMU's since the HIR 
masterfile is usually maintained at the issuance site in this system.
    (2) Certain sub-units shall not be designated as having combined 
responsibilities, even though they may perform certain functions related 
to more than one of the areas. For example, coupon issuers must maintain 
a level of coupon inventory to ensure that participants' needs are met 
on a daily basis but do not supply other issuance sites with bulk 
supplies of coupons. Such a sub-unit would not be classified as a bulk 
storage point. Certification offices may issue coupons in emergency 
situations or to meet the requirements of expedited service but do not 
routinely issue coupons to households under standard certifications. In 
these and similar situations, the sub-unit would be classified based 
upon its primary function exclusively. However, when any sub-unit is 
selected, all program requirements specified in Sec. 275.8 which the 
sub-unit has responsibility for, shall be reviewed.
    (d) Itinerant issuance and certification points. Units which certify 
households and/or issue coupons as satellites of a central sub-unit 
shall not be classified as independent sub-units. Units may be 
identified as itinerant when they do not operate on a regular basis, 
retain certification records, store coupons, transmit information 
directly to the DMU and/or develop FCS-250 reports independently. 
Examples of such units include mobile units, short term or seasonal 
operations, and units which may operate on a regular basis but do not 
meet the criteria for a sub-unit described in paragraph (a) of this 
section. However, when a sub-unit is selected for review which acts as a 
parent unit for itinerant service points, at least one itinerant point 
per sub-unit shall be reviewed if operational at the time of the review.
    (e) Selection of Sub-units for Review. State agencies shall select a 
representative number of sub-units of each category for on-site review 
in order to determine a project area's compliance with program 
standards.

[Amdt. 160, 45 FR 15900, Mar. 11, 1980; 45 FR 23638, Apr. 8, 1980; 45 FR 
46784, July 11, 1980, as amended by Amdt. 266, 52 FR 3408, Feb. 4, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 275.8  Review coverage.

    (a) During each review period, State agencies shall review the 
national target areas of program operation specified by FCS. FCS will 
notify State agencies of the minimum program areas to be reviewed at 
least 90 days before the beginning of each annual review period, which 
is the Federal fiscal year. FCS may add additional areas during the 
review period if deemed necessary. The FCS headquarters office will add 
national target areas during the review period only for deficiencies of 
national scope. State agencies have 60 days in which to establish a plan 
schedule for such reviews.
    (b) State agencies shall be responsible for reviewing each national 
target area or other program requirement based upon the provisions of 
the regulations governing the Food Stamp Program and the FCS-approved 
Plan of Operation. If FCS approves a State agency's request for a waiver 
from a program requirement, any different policy approved by FCS would 
also be reviewed. When, in the course of a review, a project area is 
found to be out of compliance with a given program requirement, the 
State agency shall identify the specifics of the problem including: the 
extent of the deficiency, the cause of the deficiency, and, as 
applicable, the specific procedural requirements the project area is 
misapplying.

[Amdt. 266, 52 FR 3408, Feb. 4, 1987, as amended by Amdt. 356, 59 FR 
29713, June 9, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 275.9  Review process.

    (a) Review procedures. State agencies shall review the program 
requirements specified for review in Sec. 275.8 of this

[[Page 769]]

part using procedures that are adequate to identify problems and the 
causes of those problems. As each project area's operational structure 
will differ, State agencies shall review each program requirement 
applicable to the project area in a manner which will best measure the 
project area's compliance with each program requirement.
    (b) ME review plan. (1) State agencies shall develop a review plan 
prior to each ME review. This review plan shall specify whether each 
project area is large, medium, or small and shall contain:
    (i) Identification of the project area to be reviewed, program areas 
to be reviewed, the dates the review will be conducted, and the period 
of time that the review will cover;
    (ii) Information secured from the project area regarding its 
caseload and organization;
    (iii) Identification of the certification offices, issuance offices, 
bulk storage points, reporting points, and data management units 
selected for review and the techniques used to select them;
    (iv) Identification of whether the State agency is using the ME 
review to monitor coupon issuers and bulk storage points as discussed 
Sec. 274.1(c)(2). At State agency option it may also indicate whether 
the State agency is using the ME review process to perform non-
discrimination reviews; and
    (v) A description of the review method(s) the State agency plans to 
use for each program area being reviewed.
    (2) ME review plans shall be maintained in an orderly fashion and be 
made available to FCS upon request.
    (c) Review methods. (1) State agenices shall determine the method of 
reviewing the program requirements associated with each program area. 
For some areas of program operation it may be necessary to use more than 
one method of review to determine if the project area is in compliance 
with program requirements. The procedures used shall be adequate to 
identify any problems and the causes of those problems.
    (2) State agencies shall ensure that the method used to review a 
program requirement does not bias the review findings. Bias can be 
introduced through leading questions, incomplete reviews, incorrect 
sampling techniques, etc.
    (d) Review worksheet. (1) State agencies shall use a review 
worksheet to record all review findings. For each sub-unit reviewed the 
State agency shall, on the worksheet, identify:
    (i) The sub-unit being reviewed;
    (ii) Each program requirement reviewed in the sub-unit;
    (iii) The method used to review each program requirement;
    (iv) A description of any deficiency detected;
    (v) The cause(s) of any deficiency detected, if known;
    (vi) The number of casefiles and/or program records selected and 
examined within the sub-unit, identification of those selected (record 
case number, household name, etc.), the proportion which were not 
subject to review, as well as the method used to select the sample;
    (vii) Where applicable, the numerical extent of any deficiency 
detected through examination of program records; and
    (viii) Any pertinent comments concerning the sub-unit's operation.
    (2) State agencies shall promptly forward review findings to the 
appropriate State office for analysis, evaluation, and corrective action 
planning. Review worksheets shall be retained in an orderly fashion and 
made available to FCS upon request.

[Amdt. 160, 45 FR 15900, Mar. 11, 1980; 45 FR 25375, Apr. 15, 1980, as 
amended by Amdt. 266, 52 FR 3409, Feb. 4, 1987; Amdt. 356, 59 FR 29713, 
June 9, 1994]


<R04>
                 Subpart C--Quality Control (QC) Reviews


<R05>
Sec. 275.10  Scope and purpose.

    (a) As part of the Performance Reporting System, each State agency 
is responsible for conducting quality control reviews. For food stamp 
quality control reviews, a sample of households shall be selected from 
two different categories: Households which are participating in the Food 
Stamp Program (called active cases) and households for which 
participation was denied or terminated (called negative cases). Reviews 
shall be conducted on active

[[Page 770]]

cases to determine if households are eligible and receiving the correct 
allotment of food stamps. The determination of whether the household 
received the correct allotment will be made by comparing the eligibility 
data gathered during the review against the amount authorized on the 
master issuance file. Reviews of negative cases shall be conducted to 
determine whether the State agency's decision to deny or terminate the 
household, as of the review date, was correct. Quality control reviews 
measure the validity of food stamp cases at a given time (the review 
date) by reviewing against the Food Stamp Program standards established 
in the Food Stamp Act and the Regulations, taking into account any FCS 
authorized waivers to deviate from specific regulatory provisions. FCS 
and the State agency shall analyze findings of the reviews to determine 
the incidence and dollar amounts of errors, which will determine the 
State agency's liability for payment errors and eligibility for enhanced 
funding in accordance with the Food Stamp Act of 1977, as amended, and 
to plan corrective action to reduce excessive levels of errors for any 
State agency that is not entitled to enhanced funding.
    (b) The objectives of quality control reviews are to provide:
    (1) A systematic method of measuring the validity of the food stamp 
caseload;
    (2) A basis for determining error rates;
    (3) A timely continuous flow of information on which to base 
corrective action at all levels of administration; and
    (4) A basis for establishing State agency liability for errors that 
exceed the National standard and State agency eligibility for enhanced 
funding.
    (c) The review process is the activity necessary to complete reviews 
and document findings of all cases selected in the sample for quality 
control reviews. The review process shall consist of: (1) Case 
assignment and completion monitoring; (2) case reviews; (3) supervisory 
review of completed worksheets and schedules; and (4) transmission of 
completed worksheets and schedules to the State agency for centralized 
data compilation and analysis.

[Amdt. 149, 44 FR 45893, Aug. 3, 1979, as amended by Amdt. 260, 49 FR 
6304, Feb. 17, 1984; 54 FR 7016, Feb. 15, 1989; Amdt. 328, 56 FR 60051, 
Nov. 27, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 275.11  Sampling.

    (a) Sampling plan. Each State agency shall develop a quality control 
sampling plan which demonstrates the integrity of its sampling 
procedures.
    (1) Content. The sampling plan shall include a complete description 
of the frame, the method of sample selection, and methods for estimating 
characteristics of the population and their sampling errors. The 
description of the sample frames shall include: source, availability, 
accuracy, completeness, components, location, form, frequency of 
updates, deletion of cases not subject to review, and structure. The 
description of the methods of sample selection shall include procedures 
for: estimating caseload size, overpull, computation of sampling 
intervals and random starts (if any), stratification or clustering (if 
any), identifying sample cases, correcting over-or undersampling, and 
monitoring sample selection and assignment. A time schedule for each 
step in the sampling procedures shall be included. If appropriate, the 
sampling plan shall include a description of its relationship, to other 
Federally-mandated quality control samples (e.g., Aid to Families with 
Dependent Children or Medicaid).
    (2) Criteria. Sampling plans proposing non-proportional integrated 
sampling, or other alternative designs shall document compliance with 
the approval criteria in paragraph (b)(4) of this section. All sampling 
plans shall:
    (i) Conform to principles of probability sampling;
    (ii) Specify and explain the basis for the sample sizes chosen by 
the State agency;
    (iii) Specify and explain the basis for the approximate number of 
sample cases to be selected each month if other than one-twelfth of the 
active and negative sample sizes; and
    (iv) If the State agency has chosen an active sample size as 
specified in paragraph (b)(1)(iii) of this section, include a statement 
that, whether or not the

[[Page 771]]

sample size is increased to reflect an increase in participation as 
discussed in paragraph (b)(3) of this section, the State agency will not 
use the size of the sample chosen as a basis for challenging the 
resulting error rates.
    (3) Design. FCS generally recommends a systematic sample design for 
both active and negative samples because of its relative ease to 
administer, its validity, and because it yields a sample proportional to 
variations in the caseload over the course of the annual review period. 
(To obtain a systematic sample, a State agency would select every kth 
case after a random start between 1 and k. The value of k is dependent 
upon the estimated size of the universe and the sample size.) A State 
agency may, however, develop an alternative sampling design better 
suited for its particular situation.
    (4) FCS review and approval. The State agency shall submit its 
sampling plan to FCS for approval as a part of its State Plan of 
Operation in accordance with Sec. 272.2(e)(4). In addition, all sampling 
procedures used by the State agency, including frame composition, 
construction, and content shall be fully documented and available for 
review by FCS.
    (b) Sample size. There are two samples for the food stamp quality 
control review process, an active case sample and a negative case 
sample. The size of both these samples is based on the State agency's 
average monthly caseload during the annual review period. Costs 
associated with a State agency's sample sizes are reimbursable as 
specified in Sec. 277.4.
    (1) Active cases. (i) All active cases shall be selected in 
accordance with standard procedures, and the review findings shall be 
included in the calculation of the State agency's payment error and 
underissuance error rates.
    (ii) Unless a State agency chooses to select and review a number of 
active cases determined by the formulas provided in paragraph 
(b)(1)(iii) of this section and has included in its sampling plan the 
reliability certification required by paragraph (a)(2)(viii) of this 
section, the minimum number of active cases to be selected and reviewed 
by a State agency during each annual review period shall be determined 
as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
     Average monthly active households       Required annual sample size
------------------------------------------------------------------------
60,000 and over...........................  n=2400.                     
10,000 to 59,999..........................  n=300+0.042(N-10,000).      
Under 10,000..............................  n=300.                      
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iii) A State agency which includes in its sampling plan the 
statement required by paragraph (a)(2)(viii) of this section may 
determine the minimum number of active cases to be selected and reviewed 
during each annual review period as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
     Average monthly active households       Required annual sample size
------------------------------------------------------------------------
60,000 and over...........................  n=1200.                     
10,000 to 59,999..........................  n=300+0.018 (N-10,000).     
Under 10,000..............................  n=300.                      
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (iv) In the formulas in paragraphs (b)(1)(ii) and (iii) of this 
section n is the required active case sample size. This is the minimum 
number of active cases subject to review which must be selected each 
review period. Also in the formulas, N is the anticipated average 
monthly participating caseload subject to quality control review (i.e., 
households which are included in the active universe defined in 
paragraph (e)(1) of this section) during the annual review period.
    (2) Negative cases. The minimum number of negative cases to be 
selected and reviewed during each annual review period shall be 
determined as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Average monthly negative households      Required annual sample size
------------------------------------------------------------------------
5,000 and over............................  n=800.                      
500 to 4,999..............................  n=150+0.144 (N-500).        
Under 500.................................  n=150.                      
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (i) In the above formula, n is the required negative sample size. 
This is the minimum number of negative cases subject to review which 
must be selected each review period.
    (ii) In the above formula, N is the anticipated average monthly 
number of negative cases which are subject to quality control review 
(i.e., households which are part of the negative universe defined in 
paragraph (e)(2) of this section) during the annual review period.
    (3) Unanticipated changes. Since the average monthly caseloads (both 
active and negative) must be estimated at the

[[Page 772]]

beginning of each annual review period, unanticipated changes can result 
in the need for adjustments to the sample size. Recognizing the 
difficulty of forecasting caseloads, State agencies will not be 
penalized if the actual caseload during a review period is less than 20 
percent larger than the estimated caseload used to determine sample 
size. If the actual caseload is more than 20 percent larger than the 
estimated caseload, the larger sample size appropriate for the actual 
caseload will be used in computing the sample completion rate.
    (4) Alternative designs. The active and negative sample size 
determinations assume that State agencies will use a systematic or 
simple random sample design. State agencies able to obtain results of 
equivalent reliability with smaller samples and appropriate design may 
use an alternative design with FCS approval. To receive FCS approval, 
proposals for any type of alternative design must:
    (i) Demonstrate that the alternative design provides payment error 
rate estimates with equal-or-better predicted precision than would be 
obtained had the State agency reviewed simple random samples of the 
sizes specified in paragraphs (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section.
    (ii) Describe all weighting, and estimation procedures if the sample 
design is non-self-weighted, or uses a sampling technique other than 
systematic sampling.
    (iii) Demonstrate that self-weighting is actually achieved in sample 
designs claimed to be self-weighting.
    (c) Sample selection. The selection of cases for quality control 
review shall be made separately for active and negative cases each month 
during the annual review period. Each month each State agency shall 
select for review approximately one-twelfth of its required sample, 
unless FCS has approved other numbers of cases specified in the sampling 
plan.
    (1) Substitutions. Once a household has been identified for 
inclusion in the sample by a predesigned sampling procedure, 
substitutions are not acceptable. An active case must be reviewed each 
time it is selected for the sample. If a household is selected more than 
once for the negative sample as the result of separate and distinct 
instances of denial or termination, it shall be reviewed each time.
    (2) Corrections. Excessive undersampling must be corrected during 
the annual review period. Excessive oversampling may be corrected at the 
State agency's option. Cases which are dropped to compensate for 
oversampling shall be reported as not subject to review. Because 
corrections must not bias the sample results, cases which are dropped to 
compensate for oversampling must comprise a random subsample of all 
cases selected (including those completed, not completed, and not 
subject to review). Cases which are added to the sample to compensate 
for undersampling must be randomly selected from the entire frame in 
accordance with the procedures specified in paragraphs (b), (c)(1), and 
(e) of this section. All sample adjustments must be fully documented and 
available for review by FCS.
    (d) Required sample size. A State agency's required sample size is 
the larger of either the number of cases selected which are subject to 
review or the number of cases chosen for selection and review according 
to paragraph (b) of this section.
    (e) Sample frame. The State agency shall select cases for quality 
control review from a sample frame. The choice of a sampling frame shall 
depend upon the criteria of timeliness, completeness, accuracy, and 
administrative burden. Complete coverage of the sample universes, as 
defined in paragraph (f) of this section, must be assured so that every 
household subject to quality control review has an equal or known chance 
of being selected in the sample. Since the food stamp quality control 
review process requires an active and negative sample, two corresponding 
sample frames are also required.
    (1) Active cases. The frame for active cases shall list all 
households which were: (i) Certified prior to, or during, the sample 
month; and (ii) issued benefits for the sample month, except for those 
households excluded from the universe in paragraph (f)(1) of this 
section. State agencies may elect to use either a list of certified 
eligible households or a list of households issued an

[[Page 773]]

allotment. If the State agency uses a list of certified eligible 
households, those households which are issued benefits for the sample 
month after the frame has been compiled shall be included in a 
supplemental list. If the State agency uses an issuance list, the State 
agency shall ensure that the list includes those households which do not 
actually receive an allotment because the entire amount is recovered for 
repayment of an overissuance in accordance with the allotment reduction 
procedures in Sec. 273.18.
    (2) Negative cases. The frame for negative cases shall list all 
households whose application for food stamps was denied or whose 
certification was terminated effective for the sample month except those 
excluded from the universe in paragraph (f)(2) of this section.
    (3) Unwanted cases. A frame may include cases for which information 
is not desired (e.g., households which have been certified but did not 
actually participate during the sample month). When such cases cannot be 
eliminated from the frame beforehand and are selected for the sample, 
they must be accounted for and reported as being not subject to review 
in accordance with the provisions in Secs. 275.12(g) and 275.13(e).
    (f) Sample universe. The State agency shall ensure that its active 
and negative case frames accurately reflect their sample universes. 
There are two sample universes for the food stamp quality control review 
process, an active case universe and a negative case universe. The 
exceptions noted below for both universes are households not usually 
amenable to quality control review.
    (1) Active cases. The universe for active cases shall include all 
households certified prior to, or during, the sample month and receiving 
food stamps for the sample month, except for the following:
    (i) A household in which all the members had died or had moved out 
of the State before the review could be undertaken or completed;
    (ii) A household receiving food stamps under a disaster 
certification authorized by FCS;
    (iii) A household which is under investigation for intentional 
Program violation, including a household with a pending administrative 
disqualification hearing;
    (iv) A household appealing an adverse action when the review date 
falls within the time period covered by continued participation pending 
the hearing; or
    (v) A household receiving restored benefits in accordance with 
Sec. 273.17 but not participating based upon an approved application. 
Other households excluded from the active case universe during the 
review process are identified in Sec. 275.12(g).
    (2) Negative cases. The universe for negative cases shall include 
all households whose application for food stamps was denied or whose 
certification was terminated effective for the sample month except the 
following:
    (i) A household which had its case closed due to expiration of the 
certification period;
    (ii) A household denied food stamps under a disaster certification 
authorized by FCS;
    (iii) A household which withdrew an application prior to the 
agency's determination;
    (iv) A household which is under investigation for intentional 
Program violation. Other households excluded from the negative case 
universe during the review process are identified in Sec. 275.13(e). The 
negative case universe shall not include negative actions taken against 
the household which do not result in the household actually being denied 
or terminated.
    (g) Demonstration projects/SSA processing. Households correctly 
classified for participation under the rules of an FCS-authorized 
demonstration project which FCS determines to significantly modify the 
rules for determining households' eligibility or allotment level, and 
households participating based upon an application processed by Social 
Security Administration personnel shall be included in the selection and 
review process. They shall be included in the universe for calculating 
sample sizes and included in the sample frames for sample selection as 
specified in paragraphs (b) through (e) of this

[[Page 774]]

section. In addition, they shall be included in the quality control 
review reports as specified in Sec. 275.21(e) and included in the 
calculation of a State agency's completion rate as specified in 
Sec. 275.25(e)(6). However, all results of reviews of active and 
negative demonstration project/SSA processed cases shall be excluded 
from the determination of State agencies' active and negative case error 
rates, payment error rates, and underissuance error rates as described 
in Sec. 275.25(c). The review of these cases shall be conducted in 
accordance with the provisions specified in Secs. 275.12(h) and 
275.13(f).

[Amdt. 260, 49 FR 6304, Feb. 17, 1984; 49 FR 14495, Apr. 12, 1984, as 
amended by Amdt. 262, 49 FR 50598, Dec. 31, 1984; Amdt. 266, 52 FR 3409, 
Feb. 4, 1987; Amdt. 328, 56 FR 60051, Nov. 27, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 275.12  Review of active cases.

    (a) General. A sample of households which were certified prior to, 
or during, the sample month and issued food stamp benefits for the 
sample month shall be selected for quality control review. These active 
cases shall be reviewed to determine if the household is eligible and, 
if eligible, whether the household is receiving the correct allotment. 
The determination of a household's eligibility shall be based on an 
examination and verification of all elements of eligibility (i.e., basic 
program requirements, resources, income, and deductions). The elements 
of eligibility are specified in Secs. 273.1 and 273.3 through 273.9. The 
verified circumstances and the resulting benefit level determined by the 
quality control review shall be compared to the benefits authorized by 
the State agency as of the review date. When changes in household 
circumstances occur, the reviewer shall determine whether the changes 
were reported by the participant and handled by the agency in accordance 
with the rules set forth in Secs. 273.12, 273.13 and 273.21, as 
appropriate. For active cases, the review date shall always fall within 
the sample month, either the first day of a calendar or fiscal month or 
the day of certification, whichever is later. The review of active cases 
shall include: a household case record review; a field investigation, 
except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section; the identification 
of any variances; an error analysis; and the reporting of review 
findings.
    (b) Household case record review. The reviewer shall examine the 
household case record to identify the specific facts relating to the 
household's eligibility and basis of issuance. If the reviewer is unable 
to locate the household case record, the reviewer shall identify as many 
of the pertinent facts as possible from the household issuance record. 
The case record review shall include all information applicable to the 
case as of the review month, including the application and worksheet in 
effect as of the review date. Documentation contained in the case record 
can be used as verification if it is not subject to change and applies 
to the sample month. If during the case record review the reviewer can 
determine and verify the household's ineligibility the review can be 
terminated at that point, provided that if the determination is based on 
information not obtained from the household then the correctness of that 
information must be confirmed as provided in paragraph (c)(2) of this 
section. The reviewer shall utilize information obtained through the 
case record review to complete column (2) of the Integrated Worksheet, 
Form FCS-380, and to tentatively plan the content of the field 
investigation.
    (c) Field investigation. A full field investigation shall be 
conducted for all active cases selected in the sample month except as 
provided in paragraph (b) of this section. A full field investigation 
shall include a review of any information pertinent to a particular case 
which is available through the State Income and Eligibility Verification 
System (IEVS) as specified in Sec. 272.8. If during the field 
investigation the reviewer determines and verifies the household's 
ineligibility, the review can be terminated at that point, provided that 
if the determination is based on information not obtained from the 
household then the correctness of that information must be confirmed as 
provided in paragraph (c)(2) of this section. In Alaska an exception to 
this requirement can be made in those isolated areas not reachable by 
regularly scheduled commercial air

[[Page 775]]

service, automobile, or other public transportation provided one fully 
documented attempt to contact the household has been made. Such cases 
may be completed through casefile review and collateral contact. The 
field investigation will include interviews with the head of household, 
spouse, or authorized representative; contact with collateral sources of 
information; and any other materials and activity pertinent to the 
review of the case. The scope of the review shall not extend beyond the 
examination of household circumstances which directly relate to the 
determination of household eligibility and basis of issuance status. The 
reviewer shall utilize information obtained through the field 
investigation to complete column (3) of the Integrated Worksheet, Form 
FCS-380.
    (1) Personal interviews. Personal interviews shall be conducted in a 
manner that respects the rights, privacy, and dignity of the 
participants. Prior to making a home visit, the reviewer shall notify 
the household that it has been selected, as part of an ongoing review 
process, for review by quality control and that a home visit will be 
made in the future. The method of notifying the household and the 
specificity of the notification shall be determined by the State agency, 
in accordance with applicable State and Federal laws. Most interviews 
will be held in the home; however, interviews can be held elsewhere when 
circumstances warrant. Under no circumstances shall the interview with 
the household be conducted by phone, except in Alaska when an exception 
to the field investigation is made in accordance with this section. 
During the interview with the participant, the reviewer shall:
    (i) Explore with the head of the household, spouse, authorized 
representative, or any other responsible household member, household 
circumstances as they affect each factor of eligibility and basis of 
issuance;
    (ii) Establish the composition of the household;
    (iii) Review the documentary evidence in the household's possession 
and secure information about collateral sources of verification; and
    (iv) Elicit from the participant names of collateral contacts. The 
reviewer shall use, but not be limited to, these designated collateral 
contacts. If required by the State, the reviewer shall obtain consent 
from the head of the household to secure collateral information. If the 
participant refuses to sign the release of information form, the 
reviewer shall explain fully the consequences of this refusal to 
cooperate (as contained in paragraph (g)(1)(ii) of this section), and 
continue the review to the fullest extent possible.
    (2) Collateral contacts. The reviewer shall obtain verification from 
collateral contacts in all instances when adequate documentation was not 
available from the participant. This second party verification shall 
cover each element of eligibility as it affects the household's 
eligibility and coupon allotment. The reviewer shall make every effort 
to use the most reliable second party verification available (for 
example, banks, payroll listings, etc.), in accordance with FCS 
guidelines, and shall thoroughly document all verification obtained. If 
any information obtained by the QC reviewer differs from that given by 
the participant, then the reviewer shall resolve the differences to 
determine which information is correct before an error determination is 
made. The manner in which the conflicting information is resolved shall 
include recontacting the participant unless the participant cannot be 
reached. When resolving conflicting information reviewers shall use 
their best judgement based on the most reliable data available and shall 
document how the differences were resolved.
    (d) Variance identification. The reviewer shall identify any element 
of a basic program requirement or the basis of issuance which varies 
(i.e., information from review findings which indicates that policy was 
applied incorrectly and/or information verified as of the review date 
that differs from that used at the most recent certification action). 
For each element that varies, the reviewer shall determine whether the 
variance was State agency or participant caused. The results of these 
determinations shall be coded and recorded in column (5) of the 
Integrated Worksheet, Form FCS-380.

[[Page 776]]

    (1) Variances included in error analysis. Except for those variances 
in an element resulting from one of the situations described in 
paragraph (d)(2) of this section, any variance involving an element of 
eligibility or basis of issuance shall be included in the error 
analysis. Such variances shall include but not be limited to those 
resulting from a State agency's failure to take the disqualification 
action related to SSN's specified in Sec. 273.6(c), and related to work 
requirements, specified in Sec. 273.7(g).
    (2) Variances excluded from error analysis. The following variances 
shall be excluded from the determination of a household's eligibility 
and basis of issuance for the sample month:
    (i) Any variance resulting from the nonverified portion of a 
household's gross nonexempt income where there is conclusive 
documentation (a listing of what attempts were made to verify and why 
they were unsuccessful) that such income could not be verified at the 
time of certification because the source of income would not cooperate 
in providing verification and no other sources of verification were 
available. If there is no conclusive documentation as explained above, 
then the reviewer shall not exclude any resulting variance from the 
error determination. This follows certification policy outlined in 
Sec. 273.2(f)(1)(i).
    (ii) Any variance in cases certified under expedited certification 
procedures resulting from postponed verification of an element of 
eligibility as allowed under Sec. 273.2(i)(4)(i). Verification of gross 
income, deductions, resources, household composition, alien status, or 
tax dependency may be postponed for cases eligible for expedited 
certification. However, if a case certified under expedited procedures 
contains a variance as a result of a residency deficiency, a mistake in 
the basis of issuance computation, a mistake in participant 
identification, or incorrect expedited income accounting, the variance 
shall be included in the error determination. This exclusion shall only 
apply to those cases which are selected for QC review in the first month 
of participation under expedited certification.
    (iii) Any variance subsequent to certification in an element of 
eligibility or basis of issuance which was not reported and was not 
required to have been reported as of the review date. The elements 
participants are required to report and the time requirements for 
reporting are specified in Secs. 273.12(a) and 273.21(h) and (i), as 
appropriate. If, however, a change in any element is reported, and the 
State agency fails to act in accordance with Secs. 273.12(c) and 
273.21(j), as appropriate, any resulting variance shall be included in 
the error determination.
    (iv) Any variance in deductible expenses which was not provided for 
in determining a household's benefit level in accordance with 
Sec. 273.2(f)(3)(i)(B). This provision allows households to have their 
benefit level determined without providing for a claimed expense when 
the expense is questionable and obtaining verification may delay 
certification. If such a household subsequently provides the needed 
verification for the claimed expense and the State agency does not 
redetermine the household's benefits in accordance with Sec. 273.12(c), 
any resulting variance shall be included in the error determination.
    (v) Any variance resulting from use by the State agency of 
information concerning households or individuals from an appropriate 
Federal source, provided that such information is correctly processed by 
the State agency. An appropriate Federal source is one which verifies: 
Income that it provides directly to the household; deductible expenses 
for which it directly bills the household; or other household 
circumstances which it is responsible for defining or establishing. To 
meet the provisions for correct processing, the eligibility worker must 
have appropriately acted on timely information. In order to be timely, 
information must be the most current that was available to the State 
agency at the time of the eligibility worker's action.
    (vi) Two variances relating to the Immigration and Naturalization 
Service's (INS) Systematic Alien Verification for Entitlements (SAVE) 
Program.
    (A) A variance based on a verification of alien documentation by 
INS. The reviewer shall exclude such variance only if the State agency 
properly used

[[Page 777]]

SAVE and the State agency provides the reviewer with:
    (1) The alien's name;
    (2) The alien's status; and
    (3) Either the Alien Status Verification Index (ASVI) Query 
Verification Number or the INS Form G-845, as annotated by INS.
    (B) A variance based on the State agency's wait for the response of 
INS to the State agency's request for official verification of the 
alien's documentation. The reviewer shall exclude such variance only if 
the State agency properly used SAVE and the State agency provides the 
reviewer with either:
    (1) The date of request, if the State agency was waiting for an 
automated response; or
    (2) A copy of the completed Form G-845, if the State agency was 
waiting for secondary verification from INS.
    (vii) Subject to the limitations provided in subparagraphs (A) 
through (F) any variance resulting from application of a new Program 
regulation or implementing memorandum (if one is sent to advise State 
agencies of a change in Federal law, in lieu of regulations) during the 
first 60 days from the required implementation date, or during the first 
90 days from the required implementation date if the regulation 
specifies 90 days.
    (A) When a regulation allows a State agency an option to implement 
prior to the required implementation date, the date on which the State 
agency chooses to implement may, at the option of the State, be 
considered to be the required implementation date for purposes of this 
provision. The exclusion period would be adjusted to begin with this 
date and end on the 60th day that follows (or the 90th day if specified 
in the regulation). States choosing to implement prior to the required 
implementation date must notify the appropriate FCS Regional Office, in 
writing, prior to implementation that they wish the 60 or 90 day 
variance exclusion to commence with actual implementation. Absent such 
notification, the exclusionary period will commence with the required 
implementation date.
    (B) A State agency shall not exclude variances which occur prior to 
the States implementation.
    (C) A State agency which did not implement until after the exclusion 
period shall not exclude variances under this provision.
    (D) Regardless of when the State agency actually implemented the 
regulation, the variance exclusion period shall end on the 60th day (or 
90th day if specified in the regulation) following the required 
implementation date, including the required implementation date defined 
in (A).
    (E) For purposes of this provision, implementation occurs on the 
effective date of State agency's written statewide notification to its 
eligibility workers.
    (F) This variance exclusion applies to changes occasioned by final 
regulations or interim regulations. In the case of a final regulation 
issued following an interim regulation, the exclusion applies only to 
significant changes made to the earlier interim regulation. A 
significant change is one which the final regulation requires the State 
agency to implement on or after publication of a final rule.
    (viii) Any variance resulting from incorrect written policy that a 
State agency acts on that is provided by a Departmental employee 
authorized to issue Food Stamp Program policy and that the State agency 
correctly applies. For purposes of this provision, written Federal 
policy is that which is issued in regulations, notices, handbooks, 
category three and four Policy Memoranda under the Policy Interpretation 
Response System, and regional policy memoranda issued pursuant to these. 
Written Federal policy is also a letter from the Food and Consumer 
Service to a State agency which contains comments on the State agency's 
food stamp manual or instructions.
    (ix) Any variance in a child support deduction which was the result 
of an unreported change subsequent to the most recent certification 
action shall be excluded from the error determination.
    (3) Other findings. Findings other than variances made during the 
review which are pertinent to the food stamp household or the case 
record may be acted on at the discretion of the State agency. Examples 
of such findings are:

[[Page 778]]

an incorrect age of a household member which is unrelated to an element 
of eligibility; an overdue subsequent certification; no current 
application on file; insufficient documentation; incorrect application 
of the verification requirements specified in part 273; and deficiencies 
in work registration procedural requirements. Such deficiencies include: 
inadequate documentation of each household member's exempt status; work 
registration form for each nonexempt household member not completed at 
the time of application and every six months thereafter; and the 
household not advised of its responsibility to report any changes in the 
exempt status of any household member.
    (e) Error analysis. The reviewer shall analyze all appropriate 
variances in completed cases, in accordance with paragraph (d) of this 
section, which are based upon verified information and determine whether 
such cases are either eligible, eligible with a basis of issuance error, 
or ineligible. The review of an active case determined ineligible shall 
be considered completed at the point of the ineligibility determination. 
For households determined eligible, the review shall be completed to the 
point where the correctness of the basis of issuance is determined, 
except in the situations outlined in paragraph (g) of this section. In 
the event that a review is conducted of a household which is receiving 
restored or retroactive benefits for the sample month, the portion of 
the allotment which is the restored or retroactive benefit shall be 
excluded from the determination of the household's eligibility and/or 
basis of issuance. A food stamp case in which a household member(s) 
receives public assistance shall be reviewed in the same manner as all 
other food stamp cases, using income as received. The determination of a 
household's eligibility and the correctness of the basis of issuance 
shall be determined based on data entered on the computation sheet as 
well as other information documented on other portions of the Integrated 
Worksheet, Form FCS-380, as appropriate.
    (f) Reporting of review findings. All information verified to be 
incorrect during the review of an active case shall be reported to the 
State agency for appropriate action on an individual case basis. This 
includes information on all variances in elements of eligibility and 
basis of issuance in both error and nonerror cases. In addition, the 
reviewer shall report the review findings on the Integrated Review 
Schedule, Form FCS-380-1, in accordance with the following procedures:
    (1) Eligibility errors. If the reviewer determines that a case is 
ineligible, the occurrence and the total allotment issued in the sample 
month shall be coded and reported. Whenever a case contains a variance 
in an element which results in an ineligibility determination and there 
are also variances in elements which would cause a basis of issuance 
error, the case shall be treated as an eligibility error. The reviewer 
shall also code and report any variances that directly contributed to 
the error determination. In addition, if the State agency has chosen to 
report information on all variances in elements of eligibility and basis 
of issuance, the reviewer shall code and report any other such variances 
which were discovered and verified during the course of the review.
    (2) Basis of issuance errors. If the reviewer determines that food 
stamp allotments were either overissued or underissued to eligible 
households in the sample month, in an amount exceeding $5.00, the 
occurrence and the amount of the error shall be coded and reported. The 
reviewer shall also code and report any variances that directly 
contributed to the error determination. In addition, if the State agency 
has chosen to report information on all variances in elements of 
eligibility and basis of issuance, the reviewer shall code and report 
any other such variances which were discovered and verified during the 
course of the review.
    (3) Automated Federal Information Exchange System Errors. Variances 
resulting from the use by the State agency of information received from 
automated Federal information exchange systems, which are excluded in 
accordance with Sec. 275.12(d)(2)(v), shall be coded and reported as 
variances. They shall not, however, be used in determining a State's 
error rates.

[[Page 779]]

    (g) Disposition of case reviews. Each case selected in the sample of 
active cases must be accounted for by classifying it as completed, not 
completed, or not subject to review. These case dispositions shall be 
coded and recorded on the Integrated Review Schedule, Form FCS-380-1.
    (1) Cases reported as not complete. Active cases shall be reported 
as not completed if the household case record cannot be located and the 
household itself is not subsequently located; if the household case 
record is located but the household cannot be located unless the 
reviewer attempts to locate the household as specified in this 
paragraph; or if the household refuses to cooperate, as discussed in 
this paragraph. All cases reported as not complete shall be reported to 
the State agency for appropriate action on an individual case basis. 
Without FCS approval, no active case shall be reported as not completed 
solely because the State agency was unable to process the case review in 
time for it to be reported in accordance with the timeframes specified 
in Sec. 275.21(b)(2).
    (i) If the reviewer is unable to locate the participant either at 
the address indicated in the case record or in the issuance record and 
the State agency is not otherwise aware of the participant's current 
address, the reviewer shall attempt to locate the household by 
contacting at least two sources which the State agency determines are 
most likely to be able to inform the reviewer of the household's current 
address. Such sources include but are not limited to:
    (A) The local office of the U.S. Postal Service;
    (B) The State Motor Vehicle Department;
    (C) The owner or property manager of the residence at the address in 
the case record; and
    (D) Any other appropriate sources based on information contained in 
the case record, such as public utility companies, telephone company, 
employers, or relatives. Once the reviewer has attempted to locate the 
household and has documented the response of each source contacted, if 
the household still cannot be located and the State agency has 
documented evidence that the household did actually exist, the State 
agency shall report the active case as not subject to review. In these 
situations documented evidence shall be considered adequate if it either 
documents two different elements of eligibility or basis of issuance, 
such as a copy of a birth certificate for age and pay status for income; 
or documents the statement of a collateral contact indicating that the 
household did exist. FCS Regional Offices will monitor the results of 
the contacts which State agencies make in attempting to locate 
households.
    (ii) If a household refuses to cooperate with the quality control 
reviewer and the State agency has taken other administrative steps to 
obtain that cooperation without obtaining it, the household shall be 
notified of the penalities for refusing to cooperate with respect to 
termination and reapplication, and of the possibility that its case will 
be referred for investigation for willful misrepresentation. If a 
household refuses to cooperate after such notice, the reviewer may 
attempt to complete the case and shall report the household's refusal to 
the State agency for termination of its participation without regard for 
the outcome of that attempt. For a determination of refusal to be made, 
the household must be able to cooperate, but clearly demonstrate that it 
will not take actions that it can take and that are required to complete 
the quality control review process. In certain circumstances, the 
household may demonstrate that it is unwilling to cooperate by not 
taking actions after having been given every reasonable opportunity to 
do so, even though the household or its members do not state that the 
household refuses to cooperate. Instances where the household's 
unwillingness to cooperate in completing a quality control review has 
the effect of a refusal to cooperate shall include the following:
    (A) The household does not respond to a letter from the reviewer 
sent Certified Mail-Return Receipt Requested within 30 days of the date 
of receipt;
    (B) The household does not attend an agreed upon interview with the 
reviewer and then does not contact the reviewer within 10 days of the 
date of

[[Page 780]]

the scheduled interview to reschedule the interview; or
    (C) The household does not return a signed release of information 
statement to the reviewer within 10 days of either agreeing to do so or 
receiving a request from the reviewer sent Certified Mail-Return Receipt 
Requested. However, in these and other situations, if there is any 
question as to whether the household has merely failed to cooperate, as 
opposed to refused to cooperate, the household shall not be reported to 
the State agency for termination.
    (2) Cases not subject to review. Cases which are not subject to 
review, if they have not been eliminated in the sampling process, shall 
be eliminated during the review process. These cases shall be as 
follows:
    (i) Death of all members of a household if they died before the 
review could be undertaken or completed;
    (ii) The household moved out of State before the review could be 
undertaken or completed;
    (iii) The household, at the time of the review, is under active 
investigation for intentional Food Stamp Program violation, including a 
household with a pending administrative disqualification hearing;
    (iv) A household receiving restored benefits in accordance with 
Sec. 273.17 but not participating based upon an approved application for 
the sample month;
    (v) A household dropped as a result of correction for oversampling;
    (vi) A household participating under disaster certification 
authorized by FCS for a natural disaster;
    (vii) A case incorrectly listed in the active frame;
    (viii) A household appealing an adverse action when the review date 
falls within the time period covered by continued participation pending 
the hearing;
    (ix) A household that did not receive benefits for the sample month; 
or
    (x) A household that still cannot be located after the reviewer has 
attempted to locate it in accordance with paragraph (g)(1)(i) of this 
section.
    (h) Demonstration projects/SSA processing. Households correctly 
classified for participation under the rules of a demonstration project 
which establishes new FCS-authorized eligibility criteria or modifies 
the rules for determining households' eligibility or allotment level 
shall be reviewed following standard procedures provided that FCS does 
not modify these procedures to reflect modifications in the treatment of 
elements of eligibility or basis of issuance in the case of a 
demonstration project. If FCS determines that information obtained from 
these cases would not be useful, then they may be excluded from review. 
A household whose most recent application for participation was 
processed by Social Security Administration personnel shall be reviewed 
following standard procedures. This includes applications for 
recertification, provided such an application is processed by the SSA as 
allowed in Sec. 273.2(k)(2)(ii).

[Amdt. 260, 49 FR 6306, Feb. 17, 1984; 49 FR 14495, Apr. 12, 1984, as 
amended by Amdt. 264, 51 FR 7207, Feb. 28, 1986; Amdt. 295, 52 FR 29658, 
Aug. 11, 1987; 53 FR 39443, Oct. 7, 1988; 53 FR 44172, Nov. 2, 1988; 
Amdt. 324, 55 FR 48834, Nov. 23, 1990; Amdt. 362, 61 FR 54292, Oct. 17, 
1996]


<R05>
Sec. 275.13  Review of negative cases.

    (a) General. A sample of households denied certification to receive 
food stamps or which had their participation in the Food Stamp Program 
terminated during a certification period effective for the sample month 
shall be selected for quality control review. These negative cases shall 
be reviewed to determine whether the State agency's decision to deny or 
terminate the household, as of the review date, was correct. For 
negative cases, the review date shall be the date of the agency's 
decision to deny or terminate program benefits. The review of negative 
cases shall include a household case record review; an error analysis; 
and the reporting of review findings.
    (b) Household case record review. The reviewer shall examine the 
household case record and verify through documentation in it whether the 
reason given for the denial or termination is correct or whether the 
denial or termination is correct for any other reason documented in the 
casefile. When the case record alone does not prove ineligibility, the 
reviewer may attempt to

[[Page 781]]

verify the element(s) of eligibility in question by telephoning either 
the household and/or a collateral contact(s). Through the review of the 
household case record, the reviewer shall complete the household case 
record sections and document the reasons for denial or termination on 
the Negative Quality Control Review Schedule, Form FCS-245.
    (c) Error analysis. (1) A negative case shall be considered correct 
if the reviewer is able to verify through documentation in the household 
case record or collateral contact that a household was correctly denied 
or terminated from the program. Whenever the reviewer is unable to 
verify the correctness of the State agency's decision to deny or 
terminate a household's participation through such documentation or 
collateral contact, the negative case shall be considered incorrect.
    (2) The reviewer shall exclude a variance when the State agency 
erroneously denied or terminated a household's participation based on an 
erroneous verification of alien documentation by the Immigration and 
Nationalization Services (INS) Systematic Alien Verification for 
Entitlements (SAVE) Program. The reviewer shall exclude the variance 
only if the State agency properly used SAVE, and the State agency 
provides the reviewer with:
    (i) The alien's name;
    (ii) The alien's status; and
    (iii) Either the Alien Status Verification Index (ASVI) Query 
Verification Number or the INS Form G-845, as annotated by INS.
    (d) Reporting of review findings. When a negative case is incorrect, 
this information shall be reported to the State agency for appropriate 
action on an individual case basis, such as recomputation of the coupon 
allotment and restoration of lost benefits. In addition, the reviewer 
shall code and record the error determination on the Negative Quality 
Control Review Schedule, Form FCS-245.
    (e) Disposition of case review. Each case selected in the sample of 
negative cases must be accounted for by classifying it as completed, not 
completed, or not subject to review. These case dispositions shall be 
coded and recorded on the Negative Quality Control Review Schedule, Form 
FCS-245.
    (1) Negative cases shall be reported as not completed if the 
reviewer, after all reasonable efforts, is unable to locate the case 
record. In no event, however, shall any negative case be reported as not 
completed solely because the State agency was unable to process the case 
review in time for it to be reported in accordance with the timeframes 
specified in Sec. 275.21(b)(2), without prior FCS approval. This 
information shall be reported to the State agency for appropriate action 
on an individual case basis.
    (2) Negative cases shall be reported as not subject to review when 
the household, at the time of the review:
    (i) Withdrew an application prior to the State agency's 
determination;
    (ii) Is under active investigation for intentional Food Stamp 
Program violation;
    (iii) Had its case closed due to expiration of the certification 
period; or
    (iv) Was dropped as a result of correction for oversampling.
    (f) Demonstration projects/SSA processing. A household whose 
application has been denied or whose participation has been terminated 
under the rules of an FCS-authorized demonstration project shall be 
reviewed following standard procedures unless FCS provides modified 
procedures to reflect the rules of the demonstration project. If FCS 
determines that information obtained from these cases would not be 
useful, then these cases may be excluded from review. A household whose 
application has been processed by SSA personnel and is subsequently 
denied participation shall be reviewed following standard procedures.

[Amdt. 260, 49 FR 6309, Feb. 17, 1984, as amended at 53 FR 39443, Oct. 
7, 1988]


<R05>
Sec. 275.14  Review processing.

    (a) General. Each State agency shall use FCS handbooks, worksheets, 
and schedules in the quality control review process.
    (b) Handbooks. The reviewer shall follow the procedures outlined in 
the Quality Control Review Handbook, FCS Handbook 310, to conduct 
quality control reviews. In addition, the sample of active and negative 
cases shall

[[Page 782]]

be selected in accordance with the sampling techniques described in the 
Quality Control Sampling Handbook, FCS Handbook 311.
    (c) Worksheets. The Integrated Review Worksheet, Form FCS-380, shall 
be used by the reviewer to record required information from the case 
record, plan and conduct the field investigation, and record findings 
which contribute to the determination of eligibility and basis of 
issuance in the review of active cases. In some instances, reviewers may 
need to supplement Form FCS-380 with other forms. The State forms for 
appointments, interoffice communications, release of information, etc., 
should be used when appropriate.
    (d) Schedules. Decisions reached by the reviewer in active case 
reviews shall be coded and recorded on the Integrated Review Schedule, 
Form FCS-380-1. Such active case review findings must be substantiated 
by information recorded on the Integrated Review Worksheet, Form FCS-
380. In negative case reviews, the review findings shall be coded and 
recorded on the Negative Quality Control Review Schedule, Form FCS-245, 
and supplemented as necessary with other documentation substantiating 
the findings.

[Amdt. 260, 49 FR 6310, Feb. 17, 1984, as amended by Amdt. 262, 49 FR 
50598, Dec. 31, 1984]


<R04>
                 Subpart D--Data Analysis and Evaluation


<R05>
Sec. 275.15  Data management.

    (a) Analysis. Analysis is the process of classifying data, such as 
by areas of program requirements or use of error-prone profiles, to 
provide a basis for studying the data and determining trends including 
significant characteristics and their relationships.
    (b) Evaluation. Evaluation is the process of determining the 
cause(s) of each deficiency, magnitude of the deficiency, and geographic 
extent of the deficiency, to provide the basis for planning and 
developing effective corrective action.
    (c) Each State agency must analyze and evaluate at the State and 
project area levels all management information sources available to:
    (1) Identify all deficiencies in program operations and systems;
    (2) Identify causal factors and their relationships;
    (3) Identify magnitude of each deficiency, where appropriate (This 
is the frequency of each deficiency occurring based on the number of 
program records reviewed and where applicable, the amount of loss either 
to the program or participants or potential participants in terms of 
dollars. The State agency shall include an estimate of the number of 
participants or potential participants affected by the existence of the 
deficiency, if applicable);
    (4) Determine the geographic extent of each deficiency (e.g., 
Statewide/individual project area or management unit); and,
    (5) Provide a basis for management decisions on planning, 
implementing, and evaluating corrective action.
    (d) In the evaluation of data, situations may arise where the State 
agency identifies the existence of a deficiency, but after reviewing all 
available management information sources sufficient information is not 
available to make a determination of the actual causal factor(s), 
magnitude, or geographic extent necessary for the development of 
appropriate corrective action. In these situations, the State agency 
shall be responsible for gathering additional data necessary to make 
these determinations. This action may include, but is not limited to, 
conducting additional full or partial ME reviews in one or more project 
areas/management units or discussions with appropriate officials.
    (e) Deficiencies identified from all management information sources 
must be analyzed and evaluated together to determine their causes, 
magnitude, and geographic extent. Causes indicated and deficiencies 
identified must be examined to determine if they are attributable to a 
single cause and can be effectively eliminated by a single action. 
Deficiencies and causes identified must also be compared to the results 
of past corrective action efforts to determine if the new problems arise 
from the causal factors which contributed to the occurrence of 
previously identified deficiencies.

[[Page 783]]

    (f) Data analysis and evaluation must be an ongoing process to 
facilitate the development of effective and prompt corrective action. 
The process shall also identify when deficiencies have been eliminated 
through corrective action efforts, and shall provide for the 
reevaluation of deficiencies and causes when it is determined that 
corrective action has not been effective.
    (g) Identification of High Error Project Areas/Counties/Local 
Offices. FCS may use quality control information to determine which 
project areas/counties/local offices have reported payment error rates 
that are either significantly greater than the State agency average or 
greater than the national error standard of the Program. When FCS 
notifies a State agency that a ``high error'' area exists, the State 
agency shall ensure that corrective action is developed and reported in 
accordance with the provisions of Sec. 275.17. If FCS identifies a 
``high error'' locality which a State agency has previously identified 
as error-prone and taken appropriate action, no further State agency 
shall be required. If a State agency's corrective action plan fails to 
address problems in FCS-identified ``high error'' areas, FCS may require 
a State agency to implement new or modified cost-effective procedures 
for the certification of households.

[Amdt. 160, 45 FR 15909, Mar. 11, 1980, as amended by Amdt. 266, 52 FR 
3409, Feb. 4, 1987; Amdt. 320, 55 FR 6240, Feb. 22, 1990]


<R04>
                      Subpart E--Corrective Action


<R05>
Sec. 275.16  Corrective action planning.

    (a) Corrective action planning is the process by which State 
agencies shall determine appropriate actions to reduce substantially or 
eliminate deficiencies in program operations and provide responsive 
service to eligible households.
    (b) The State agency and project area(s)/management unit(s), as 
appropriate, shall implement corrective action on all identified 
deficiencies. Deficiencies requiring action by the State agency or the 
combined efforts of the State agency and the project area(s)/management 
unit(s) in the planning, development, and implementation of corrective 
action are those which:
    (1) Result from evaluation of yearly targets (actions to correct 
errors in individual cases however, shall not be submitted as part of 
the State agency's corrective action plan);
    (2) Are the cause for non-entitlement to enhanced funding for any 
reporting period (actions to correct errors in individual cases however, 
shall not be submitted as part of the State agency's corrective action 
plan);
    (3) Are the causes of other errors/deficiencies detected through 
quality control, including error rates of 1 percent or more in negative 
cases (actions to correct errors in individual cases, however, shall not 
be submitted as part of the State agency's corrective action plan);
    (4) Are identified by FCS reviews, GAO audits, contract audits, or 
USDA audits or investigations at the State agency or project area level 
(except deficiencies in isolated cases as indicated by FCS); and,
    (5) Result from 5 percent or more of the State agency's QC sample 
being coded ``not complete'' as defined in Sec. 275.12(g)(1) of this 
part. This standard shall apply separately to both active and negative 
samples.
    (6) Result in under issuances, improper denials, or improper 
terminations of benefits to eligible households where such errors are 
caused by State agency rules, practices or procedures.
    (c) The State agency shall ensure that appropriate corrective action 
is taken on all deficiencies including each case found to be in error by 
quality control reviews and those deficiencies requiring corrective 
action only at the project area level. Moreover, when a substantial 
number of deficiencies are identified which require State agency level 
and/or project area/management unit corrective action, the State agency 
and/or project area/management unit shall establish an order of priority 
to ensure that the most serious deficiencies are addressed immediately 
and corrected as soon as possible. Primary factors to be considered when 
determining the most serious deficiencies are:
    (1) Magnitude of the deficiency as defined in Sec. 275.15(c)(3) of 
this part;

[[Page 784]]

    (2) Geographic extent of the deficiency (e.g., Statewide/project 
area or management unit);
    (3) Anticipated results of corrective actions; and
    (4) High probability of errors occurring as identified through all 
management evaluation sources.
    (d) In planning corrective action, the State agency shall coordinate 
actions in the areas of data analysis, policy development, quality 
control, program evaluation, operations, administrative cost management, 
civil rights, and training to develop appropriate and effective 
corrective action measures.

[Amdt. 160, 45 FR 15909, Mar. 11, 1980, as amended by Amdt. 169, 46 FR 
7263, Jan. 23, 1981; Amdt. 262, 49 FR 50598, Dec. 31, 1984; Amdt. 266, 
52 FR 3409, Feb. 4, 1987; Amdt. 328, 56 FR 60052, Nov. 27, 1991]


<R05>
Sec. 275.17  State corrective action plan.

    (a) State agencies shall prepare corrective action plans addressing 
those deficiencies specified in Sec. 275.16(b) requiring action by the 
State agency or the combined efforts of the State agency and the project 
area(s)/management unit(s). This corrective action plan is an open-ended 
plan and shall remain in effect until all deficiencies in program 
operations have been reduced substantially or eliminated. State agencies 
shall provide updates to their corrective action plans through regular, 
semiannual updates. These semiannual updates shall be received by FCS by 
May 1st and November 1st respectively. Such updates must contain:
    (1) Any additional deficiencies identified since the previous 
corrective action plan update;
    (2) Documentation that a deficiency has been corrected and is 
therefore being removed from the plan; and
    (3) Any changes to planned corrective actions for previously 
reported deficiencies.
    (b) Content. State corrective action plans shall contain, but not 
necessarily be limited to, the following, based on the most recent 
information available:
    (1) Specific description and identification of each deficiency;
    (2) Source(s) through which the deficiency was detected;
    (3) Magnitude of each deficiency, if appropriate, as defined in 
Sec. 275.15(c)(3) of this part;
    (4) Geographic extent of the deficiency (e.g., Statewide/project 
area or management unit--specific project areas in which the deficiency 
occurs);
    (5) Identification of causal factor(s) contributing to the 
occurrence of each deficiency;
    (6) Identification of any action already completed to eliminate the 
deficiency;
    (7) For each deficiency, an outline of actions to be taken, the 
expected outcome of each action, the target date for each action, and 
the date by which each deficiency will have been eliminated; and
    (8) For each deficiency, a description of the manner in which the 
State agency will monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of the 
corrective action in eliminating the deficiency.
    (c) FCS will provide technical assistance in developing corrective 
action plans when requested by State agencies.
    (d) State agencies will be held accountable for the efficient and 
effective operation of all areas of the program. FCS is not precluded 
from issuing a warning as specified in part 276 because a deficiency is 
included in the State agency's corrective action plan.

[Amdt. 160, 45 FR 15909, Mar. 11, 1980, as amended by Amdt. 266, 52 FR 
3409, Feb. 4, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 275.18  Project area/management unit corrective action plan.

    (a) The State agency shall ensure that corrective action plans are 
prepared at the project area/management unit level, addressing those 
deficiencies not required to be included in the State corrective action 
plan. State agencies may elect to prepare these plans for or in 
cooperation with the project area. These project area/management unit 
corrective action plans shall be open-ended and shall remain in effect 
until all deficiencies in program operations have been reduced 
substantially or eliminated. Any deficiencies detected through any 
source not previously reported to the State agency which require 
incorporation into the

[[Page 785]]

Project Area/Management Unit Corrective Action Plan shall be submitted 
to the State agency within 60 days of identification. As deficiencies 
are reduced substantially or eliminated, the project area/management 
unit shall notify the State agency in writing. The project area/
management unit shall be responsible for documenting why each deficiency 
is being removed from the Plan. The removal of any deficiency from the 
Plan will be subject to State agency and FCS review and validation.
    (b) Content. Project area/management unit corrective action plans 
shall contain all the information necessary to enable the State agency 
to monitor and evaluate the corrective action properly. Also, State 
agencies shall establish requirements for project area/management units 
in planning, implementing and reporting corrective action to assist the 
State agency's efforts to fulfill its responsibilities for determining 
which deficiencies must be addressed in the State corrective action 
plan. States should consider requiring project area/management unit 
plans to include the following, based on the most recent information 
available:
    (1) Specific description and identification of each deficiency;
    (2) Source(s) through which the deficiency was detected;
    (3) Magnitude of each deficiency, if appropriate, as defined in 
Sec. 275.15(c)(3) of this part;
    (4) Geographic extent of the deficiency (throughout the project 
area/management unit or only in specific offices);
    (5) Identification of causal factor(s) contributing to the 
occurrence of each deficiency;
    (6) Identification of any action already completed to eliminate the 
deficiency;
    (7) For each deficiency, an outline of actions to be taken, the 
expected outcome of each action, the target date for each action, the 
date by which each deficiency will have been eliminated; and
    (8) For each deficiency, a description of the manner in which the 
project area/management unit will monitor and evaluate the effectiveness 
of the corrective action in eliminating the deficiency.

[Amdt. 160, 45 FR 15909, Mar. 11, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 275.19  Monitoring and evaluation.

    (a) The State agency shall establish a system for monitoring and 
evaluating corrective action at the State and project area levels. 
Monitoring and evaluation shall be an ongoing process to determine that 
deficiencies are being substantially reduced or eliminated in an 
efficient manner and that the program provides responsive service to 
eligible households.
    (b) The State agency shall ensure that corrective action on all 
deficiencies identified in the State Corrective Action Plan and Project 
Area/Management Unit Corrective Action Plan is implemented and achieves 
the anticipated results within the specified time frames. The State 
agency shall monitor and evaluate corrective action at the State and 
project levels through a combination of reports, field reviews, and 
examination of current data available through program management tools 
and other sources.
    (c) In instances where the State agency and/or the project area/
management unit determines that the proposed corrective action is not 
effective in reducing substantially or eliminating deficiencies, the 
State agency and/or the project area/management unit shall promptly 
reevaluate the deficiency, causes, and the corrective action taken, and 
develop and implement new corrective actions.

[Amdt. 160, 45 FR 15909, Mar. 11, 1980]


<R04>
    Subpart F--Responsibilities for Reporting on Program Performance


<R05>
Sec. 275.20  ME review schedules.

    (a) Each State agency shall submit its review schedule to the 
appropriate FCS regional office at least 60 days prior to the beginning 
of the next year's review period (the Federal fiscal year). These 
schedules must ensure that all project areas/management units will be 
reviewed within the required time limits. Each schedule shall identify 
the project areas/management units in each classification and list each 
project area to be reviewed by month or by quarter. A State agency may 
submit a request to use an alternate review schedule at any time. The

[[Page 786]]

alternate schedule shall not be effective until approved by FCS in 
accordance with Sec. 275.5(b)(2).
    (b) State agencies shall notify the appropriate FCS regional office 
of all changes in review schedules.

[Amdt. 266, 52 FR 3410, Feb. 4, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 275.21  Quality control review reports.

    (a) General. Each State agency shall submit reports on the 
performance of quality control reviews in accordance with the 
requirements outlined in this section. These reports are designed to 
enable FCS to monitor the State agency's compliance with Program 
requirements relative to the Quality Control Review System. Every case 
selected for review during the sample month must be accounted for and 
reflected in the appropriate report(s).
    (b) Individual cases. The State agency shall report the review 
findings on each case selected for review during the sample month. For 
active cases, the State agency shall submit the edited findings of the 
Integrated Review Schedule, Form FCS-380-1. For negative cases, the 
State agency shall submit a summary report which is produced from the 
edited findings on individual cases which are coded on the Negative 
Quality Control Review Schedule, Form FCS-245. The review findings shall 
be reported as follows:
    (1) The State agency shall input and edit the results of each active 
and negative case into the FCS supplied computer terminal and transmit 
the data to the host computer. For State agencies that do not have FCS 
supplied terminals, the State agency shall submit the results of each QC 
review in a format specified by FCS. Upon State agency request, FCS will 
consider approval of a change in the review results after they have been 
reported to FCS.
    (2) The State agency shall dispose of and report the findings of 90 
percent of all cases selected in a given sample month so that they are 
received by FCS within 75 days of the end of the sample month. All cases 
selected in a sample month shall be disposed of and the findings 
reported so that they are received by FCS within 95 days of the end of 
the sample month.
    (3) The State agency shall supply the FCS Regional Office with 
individual household case records and the pertinent information 
contained in the individual case records, or legible copies of that 
material, as well as legible hard copies of individual Forms FCS-380, 
FCS-380-1, and FCS-245 or other FCS-approved report forms, within 10 
days of receipt of a request for such information.
    (4) For each case that remains pending 95 days after the end of the 
sample month, the State agency shall immediately submit a report that 
includes an explanation of why the case has not been disposed of, 
documentation describing the progress of the review to date, and the 
date by which it will be completed. If FCS determines that the above 
report does not sufficiently justify the case's pending status, the case 
shall be considered overdue. Depending upon the number of overdue cases, 
FCS may find the State agency's QC system to be inefficient or 
ineffective and suspend and/or disallow the State agency's Federal share 
of administrative funds in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 276.4.
    (c) Monthly status. The State agency shall report the monthly 
progress of sample selection and completion on the Form FCS-248, Status 
of Sample Selection and Completion or other format specified by FCS. 
This report shall be submitted to FCS so that it is received no later 
than 105 days after the end of the sample month. Each report shall 
reflect sampling and review activity for a given sample month.
    (d) Annual results. The State agency shall annually report the 
results of all quality control reviews during the review period. For 
this report, the State agency shall submit the edited results of all QC 
reviews on the Form FCS-247, Statistical Summary of Sample Distribution 
or other format specified by FCS. This report shall be submitted to FCS 
so that it is received no later than 105 days from the end of the annual 
review period. Every case selected in the active or negative sample must 
be accounted for and reported to FCS, including cases not subject to 
review, not completed, and completed.
    (e) Demonstration projects/SSA processing. The State agency shall 
identify the

[[Page 787]]

monthly status of active and negative demonstration project/SSA 
processed cases (i.e., those cases described in Sec. 275.11(g)) on the 
Form FCS-248, described in paragraph (c) of this section. In addition, 
the State agency shall identify the annual results of such cases on the 
Form FCS-247, described in paragraph (d) of this section.

[Amdt. 260, 49 FR 6310, Feb. 17, 1984, as amended by Amdt. 262, 49 FR 
50598, Dec. 31, 1984; Amdt. 266, 52 FR 3410, Feb. 4, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 275.22  Administrative procedure.

    Reports on program performance are intended to provide the State an 
opportunity to determine compliance with program requirements, identify 
and resolve emerging problems, and assess the effectiveness of actions 
that have been taken to correct existing problems. States' reports 
enable FCS to assess the nationwide status of eligibility and basis of 
issuance determinations, to ensure State compliance with Federal 
requirements, to assist States in improving and strengthening their 
programs, and to develop Federal policies. Reports must be submitted in 
duplicate to the appropriate FCS Regional Office according to the time 
frames established in Secs. 275.20, 275.21, and 275.22 of this part.

[Amdt. 160, 45 FR 15911, Mar. 11, 1980. Redesignated at 52 FR 3410, Feb. 
4, 1987]


<R04>
                     Subpart G--Program Performance


<R05>
Sec. 275.23  Determination of State agency program performance.

    (a) FCS shall determine the efficiency and effectiveness of a 
State's administration of the Food Stamp Program by measuring:
    (1) State compliance with the standards contained in the Food Stamp 
Act, regulations, and the State Plan of Operation; and
    (2) State efforts to improve program operations through corrective 
action.
    (b) This determination shall be made based on:
    (1) Reports submitted to FCS by the State;
    (2) FCS reviews of State agency operations;
    (3) State performance reporting systems and corrective action 
efforts; and
    (4) Other available information such as Federal audits and 
investigations, civil rights reviews, administrative cost data, 
complaints, and any pending litigation.
    (c) State agency error rates. FCS shall estimate each State agency's 
error rates based on the results of quality control review reports 
submitted in accordance with the requirements outlined in Sec. 275.21. 
The State agency's active case error, payment error, underissuance 
error, and negative case error rates shall be estimated as follows:
    (1) Active case error rate. The active case error rate shall include 
the proportion of active sample cases which were reported as ineligible 
or as receiving an incorrect allotment (as described in Sec. 275.12(e)) 
based upon certification policy as set forth in part 273.
    (2) Payment error rate. (i) For fiscal years prior to Fiscal Year 
1986, the payment error rate shall include the value of the allotments 
overissued, including overissuances to ineligible cases, for those cases 
included in the active error rate.
    (ii) For Fiscal Year 1986 and subsequent fiscal years, the payment 
error rate shall include the value of the allotments overissued, 
including those to ineligible cases, and the value of allotments 
underissued for those cases included in the active error rate.
    (3) Underissuance error rate. Prior to Fiscal Year 1986, the 
underissuance error rate shall include the value of the allotments 
reported as underissued for those cases included in the active case 
error rate.
    (4) Negative case error rate. The negative case error rate shall be 
the proportion of negative sample cases which were reported as having 
been eligible at the time of denial or termination (as described in 
Sec. 275.13(c)) based upon certification policy as set forth in part 
273.
    (5) Demonstration projects/SSA processing. The reported results of 
reviews of active and negative demonstration project/SSA processed 
cases, as described in Sec. 275.11(g), shall be excluded from the 
estimate of the active case error rate, payment error rate, 
underissuance error rate, and negative case error rate.

[[Page 788]]

    (d) Federal enhanced funding. (1) Before making enhanced funding 
available to a State agency, as described in Sec. 277.4(b), FCS will:
    (i) Validate the State agency's estimated payment error rate, 
underissuance error rate, and negative case error rate, as provided for 
in Sec. 275.3(c);
    (ii) Ensure that the sampling techniques used by the State agency 
are FCS-approved procedures, as established in Sec. 275.11; and
    (iii) Validate the State agency's quality control completion rate to 
ensure that all of the minimum required sample cases, of both active and 
negative quality control samples, have been completed. This completion 
standard is applied separately to the active and negative case samples, 
and the State agency's estimated payment and underissuance error rates 
will be adjusted separately, if necessary, to account for those required 
cases not completed, in accordance with the procedures described in 
paragraph (e)(6)(iii) of this section for adjustment of the payment 
error rate.
    (2) After validation and any necessary adjustment of estimated error 
rates:
    (i) A State agency with a combined payment error rate and 
underissuance error rate of less than five percent for an annual review 
period for Fiscal Year 1983 through Fiscal Year 1985, or a payment error 
rate of less than five percent for an annual review period for Fiscal 
Year 1986 through Fiscal Year 1988, shall be eligible for a 60 percent 
Federally funded share of administrative costs, provided that the State 
agency's negative case error rate for that period is less than the 
national weighted mean negative case error rate for the prior fiscal 
year;
    (ii) Beginning with Fiscal Year 1989, a State agency with a payment 
error rate less than or equal to 5.90 percent and with a negative case 
error rate less than the national weighted mean negative case rate for 
the prior fiscal year will have its Federally funded share of 
administrative costs increased by one percentage point to a maximum of 
60 percent for each full one-tenth of a percentage point by which the 
payment error rate is less than six percent.
    (3) State agencies entitled to enhanced funding shall receive the 
additional funding on a retroactive basis only for the review period in 
which their error rates are less than the levels described in paragraph 
(d)(2) of this section.
    (e) State agencies' liabilities for payment error rates. (1) At the 
end of each fiscal year, each State agency's payment error rate over the 
entire fiscal year will be computed, as described in paragraph (e)(6) of 
this section, and evaluated to determine whether the payment error rate 
goals established in the following paragraphs have been met.
    (2) Establishment of payment error rate goals--Fiscal Year 1983 
through Fiscal Year 1985. (i) Each State agency's payment error rate 
goal for Fiscal Year 1983 shall be nine percent. Each State agency's 
payment error rate goal for Fiscal Year 1984 shall be seven percent. 
Each State agency's payment error rate goal for Fiscal Year 1985 shall 
be five percent. State agencies' payment error rates for any fiscal year 
shall be derived from the review period corresponding to the fiscal 
year.
    (ii) If a State agency fails to achieve a nine percent payment error 
rate in Fiscal Year 1983 but reduces its payment error rate for Fiscal 
Year 1983 by 33.3 percent (or more) of the difference between its 
payment error rate during the period of October 1980 through March 1981 
and a five percent payment error rate, the State agency shall bear no 
fiscal liability for its payment error rate. If a State agency fails to 
achieve a seven percent payment error rate in Fiscal Year 1984, but 
reduces its payment error rate for Fiscal Year 1984 by 66.7 percent (or 
more) of the difference between its payment error rate during the period 
of October 1980 through March 1981 and a five percent payment error 
rate, the State agency shall bear no fiscal liability for its payment 
error rate.
    (iii) State agencies' payment error rates shall be rounded to the 
nearest one hundredth of a percent with .005 and above being rounded up 
to the next highest one-hundredth and .004 and below being rounded to 
the next lowest one-hundredth.

[[Page 789]]

    (3) State agencies failing to achieve payment error rate goals--
Fiscal Year 1983 through Fiscal Year 1985. Each State agency which fails 
to achieve its payment error rate goal during a fiscal year shall be 
liable as specified in the following paragraphs.
    (i) For every percentage point, or fraction thereof, by which a 
State agency's payment error rate exceeds the goal for a fiscal year, 
FCS shall reduce the money it pays for the State agency's Food Stamp 
Program administrative costs by five percent for that fiscal year; 
provided that for every percentage point, or fraction thereof, by which 
a State agency's payment error rate exceeds its goal by more than three 
percentage points, FCS shall reduce the Federally funded share of Food 
Stamp Program administrative costs by ten percent for the applicable 
fiscal year. Thus, if a State agency's reported error rate in Fiscal 
Year 1983 is 10.5 percent, its Federal administrative funding could be 
reduced by ten percent. A 13.1 percent error rate, or 4.1 percentage 
points above the goal, would result in a reduction of 5 percent for each 
of the three first points, 10 percent for the fourth point and another 
10 percent for the fraction above 4 percentage points. This would amount 
to a 35 percent reduction in Federal administrative funds unless the 
provisions of paragraph (e)(3)(ii) are applicable to the State agency's 
circumstances.
    (ii) If a State agency fails to reach its payment error rate goal 
but reduces its error rate as explained in paragraph (e)(2)(ii) for a 
given fiscal year it will bear no liability for its error rates. If, 
however, a State agency fails to reach the established goal and fails to 
meet the reduction percentage for Fiscal Year 1983 and/or 1984, its 
Federally funded share of program administrative costs shall be reduced 
by five percent for every percentage point, or fraction thereof, (with a 
10 percent reduction applied for every percentage point or fraction 
above 3 percentage points) by which its error rate exceeds the payment 
error rate it would have achieved had it met the 33.3 or 66.7 percent 
reduction percentage for the applicable fiscal year. Thus, if a State 
agency's payment error rate during the October through March 1981 period 
was 13 percent and its error rate for Fiscal Year 1983 is 11 percent, it 
will have failed to achieve a 33.3 percent reduction 
(13-(13-5)(33.3)=10.34 percent), i.e., the rate the State agency would 
have achieved had it met the reduction percentage) and incurred a 
liability equal to five percent of its Federal administrative funding. 
If the State agency's payment error rate increased to 13 percent in 
Fiscal Year 1984, it will have missed a 66.7 percent reduction by 5.34 
percentage points (13-(13-5)(66.7)=7.66 percent) and incurred a 
liability equal to 45 percent of its Federal administrative funding. In 
the latter example, the 45 percent funding reduction results from a 15 
percent reduction for the first three percentage points and 30 percent 
for the additional 2.34 percentage points by which the State agency 
exceeded a 7.66 percent error rate.
    (iii) If a State agency is found liable for an excessive payment 
error rate, the amount of liability will be calculated by: (A) 
Multiplying the percent the Federal share is to be reduced by the base 
Federal reimbursement rate of 50 percent; (B) subtracting the product of 
(A) from 50 percent; and (C) multiplying the result of (B) by the State 
agency's costs covered under the base Federal reimbursement rate for the 
fiscal year in which the State agency incurred the liability. For 
example, if the total administrative costs (State and Federal) in a 
State agency are $4,000,000 for the fiscal year, and the State agency's 
Federal funding is to be reduced by 25 percent, the State agency would 
be reimbursed at a rate of 37.5 percent (i.e., 50 percent minus 25 
percent times 50 percent) or $1,500,000. The State agency's liability 
would be $500,000 or 12.5 percent of its administative costs.
    (iv) A State's federally funded share of administrative costs shall 
not be reduced by an amount that exceeds the difference between its 
payment error rate goal (or what its error rate would have been had it 
met the reduction criteria of paragraph (ii) above) and its actual error 
rates expressed as a percentage of its total issuance during the fiscal 
year. Therefore, if the State agency in the above example issued 
$10,000,000 in food stamps in the fiscal

[[Page 790]]

year and exceeded its goal by four percentage points (as demonstrated by 
a 25 percent reduction in Federal funding), the State agency's liability 
would be capped at $400,000 ((.04)(10,000,000)), even though the 
calculation based upon administrative funds would result in a liability 
of $500,000.
    (4) State agencies' liabilities for payment error--Fiscal Year 1986 
and Beyond. Each State agency that fails to achieve its payment error 
rate goal during a fiscal year shall be liable as specified in the 
following paragraphs.
    (i) For Fiscal Year 1986 and subsequent years, FCS shall announce a 
national performance measure within nine months following the end of 
each fiscal year that is the sum of the products of each State agency's 
payment error rate times that State agency's proportion of the total 
value of national allotments issued for the fiscal year using the most 
recent issuance data available at the time the State agency is initially 
notified of its payment error rate. Once announced, the national 
performance measure for a given fiscal year will not be subject to 
change. This national performance measure is used to establish a 
payment-error tolerance level. The payment-error tolerance level for any 
fiscal year shall be one percentage point added to the lowest national 
performance measure ever announced up to and including such fiscal year.
    (ii) For any fiscal year in which a State agency's payment error 
rate exceeds the payment-error tolerance level, the State agency shall 
pay or have its share of administrative costs reduced by an amount equal 
to the difference between its payment error rate less such tolerance 
level as a quantity, multiplied by the total value of the allotments 
issued in the fiscal year by that State agency.
    (5) Relationship to warning process and negligence. (i) States' 
liability for payment error rates as determined above are not subject to 
the warning process of Sec. 276.4(d). However, State agencies shall be 
notified by certified mail, return receipt requested, at least sixty 
days before any billing and shall have sixty days following such notice 
to request a good cause waiver of part or all of their potential 
liability. The billing will not occur until after the expiration of the 
sixty days and the Secretary's determination of good cause when it is 
timely requested. If a determination is made that good cause did not 
exist, FCS shall promptly issue the billing. While the amount of a 
State's liability may be recovered through offsets to their letter of 
credit as identified in Sec. 277.16(c), FCS shall also have the option 
of billing a State directly or using other claims collection mechanisms 
authorized under the Federal Claims Collection Act, depending upon the 
amount of the State's liability.
    (ii) FCS shall not determine negligence (as described in Sec. 276.3) 
based on the overall payment error rate for issuances to ineligible 
households and overissuances to eligible households in a State or 
political subdivision thereof. FCS may only establish a claim under 
Sec. 276.3 for dollar losses from failure to comply, due to negligence 
on the part of the State agency (as defined under Sec. 276.3), with 
specific certification requirements. Thus, FCS will not use the results 
of States' QC reviews to determine negligence.
    (iii) Whenever a State is assessed for an excessive payment error 
rate, the State shall have the right to request an appeal in accordance 
with procedures set forth in part 283 of this chapter.
    (6) Good cause--(i) Events. When a State agency with otherwise 
effective administration exceeds the allowable level for payment errors 
as described in this section, FCS may determine that the State agency 
had good cause for not achieving the payment error rate tolerance if the 
State agency documents that an unusual event or events had a large 
uncontrollable effect upon error rates, and grant relief from quality 
control liabilities that would otherwise be levied under this section of 
the regulations. States desiring such relief must submit a request in 
writing within 60 days from the date of receipt of notification of the 
official payment error rate and potential liability. If no request for a 
good cause waiver is received by the Secretary within the required time, 
the Secretary shall make a determination that there was no basis for 
good cause relief. Within 30 days from the date of receipt of this 
determination, the State may submit a

[[Page 791]]

fully documented good cause request and provide reasonable justification 
for failure to submit the good cause request within the required time 
frame. If the State can demonstrate good reason why the request for a 
good cause waiver was not timely made, the Secretary will review the 
State's good cause request. If a State fails to demonstrate good reason 
for failure to timely request a good cause waiver, the initial 
determination will stand. The following are unusual events which State 
agencies may use as a basis for requesting good cause relief and 
specific information that FCS expects State agencies to submit to 
justify such requests for relief:
    (A) Natural disasters such as those under the authority of the 
Stafford Act of 1988 (Pub. L. 1020-707), which amended the Disaster 
Relief Act of 1974 (Pub. L. 93-288) or civil disorders that adversely 
affect program operations. For disasters prior to November 23, 1988 see 
the Disaster Relief Act of 1974, as amended (42 U.S.C. 5121 et seq., 
Pub. L. 93-288). When submitting a request for good cause relief based 
on this example, the State agency shall provide the following 
information:
    (1) The nature of the disaster(s) (e.g. a tornado, hurricane, 
earthquake, flood, etc.) or civil disorder(s)) and evidence that the 
President has declared a disaster;
    (2) The date(s) of the occurrence;
    (3) The date(s) after the occurrence when program operations were 
affected;
    (4) The geographic extent of the occurrence (i.e. the county or 
counties where the disaster occurred);
    (5) The proportion of the food stamp caseload whose management was 
affected;
    (6) The reason(s) why the State agency was unable to control the 
effects of the disaster on program administration and errors;
    (7) The Identification and explanation of the uncontrollable nature 
of errors caused by the event (types of errors, geographic location of 
the errors, time period during which the errors occurred, etc.);
    (8) The percentage of the reported payment error rate that resulted 
from the occurrence and how this figure was derived; and
    (9) The reported payment error rate in the twelve-month period 
immediately prior to the event and reported payment error rate during 
the remainder of the subject fiscal year.

The Secretary shall evaluate the State agency's request and waive any 
portion of the liability which the Secretary attributes to the 
uncontrollable effects of a disaster or civil disorder. In this 
evaluation, the Secretary will consider the following factors: 
Geographical impact of the disaster; State efforts to control impact on 
program operations; the proportion of food stamp caseload affected; and/
or the duration of the disaster and its impact on program operations. 
Adjustments for these factors may result in a waiver of all, part, or 
none of the error rate liabilities for the applicable period. If the 
Secretary determines that a State agency has provided insufficient 
information or that sufficient information is not otherwise available 
from existing Department records to determine a waiver amount for the 
uncontrollable effects of a natural disaster or civil disorder using 
factual analysis, the Secretary shall determine a formula derived waiver 
amount by: Determining the number of months during the eighteen months 
that begins six months before the subject review period during which a 
civil disorder or Federally-declared disaster impaired Food Stamp 
Program operations; determining an amount equal to one-eighteenth of the 
liability for each month for the portion of the unusual event which 
occurred during the period six months prior to the fiscal year; 
determining an amount equal to one-twelfth of the liability for each 
month for the portion of the unusual event which occurred during the 
fiscal year; and as appropriate, adjust the waiver amount to reflect 
States' otherwise effective administration of the program based upon 
recent error rate history. For example, a reduction in the amount may be 
made when a State agency's recent error rate history indicates that even 
absent the events described, the State agency would have exceeded error 
rate tolerances in the review period. Under this approach, unless the 
State agency can demonstrate

[[Page 792]]

a direct uncontrollable impact on the error rate, FCS will not grant 
relief for the effects of disasters or civil disorders that ended prior 
to the second half of the prior fiscal year.
    (B) Strikes by state agency staff necessary to determine Food Stamp 
Program eligibility and process case changes. When submitting a request 
for good cause relief based on this example, the State agency shall 
provide the following information:
    (1) Which workers (i.e. eligibility workers, clerks, data input 
staff, etc.) and how many (number and percentage of total staff) were on 
strike or refused to cross picket lines;
    (2) The date(s) and nature of the strike (i.e. the issues 
surrounding the strike);
    (3) The date(s) after the occurrence when program operations were 
affected;
    (4) The geographic extent of the strike (i.e. the county or counties 
where the strike occurred);
    (5) The proportion of the food stamp caseload whose management was 
affected;
    (6) The reason(s) why the State agency was unable to control the 
effects of the strike on program administration and errors;
    (7) Identification and explanation of the uncontrollable nature of 
errors caused by the event (types of errors, geographic location of the 
errors, time period during which the errors occurred, etc.);
    (8) The percentage of the reported payment error rate that resulted 
from the strike and how this figure was derived; and
    (9) The reported payment error rate in the twelve-month period 
immediately prior to the event and the payment error rate during the 
remainder of the subject fiscal year.

The Secretary shall evaluate the State agency's request and waive any 
portion of the liability which the Secretary attributes to the 
uncontrollable effects of the strike. In this evaluation, the Secretary 
will consider the following factors: Geographical impact of the strike; 
State efforts to control impact on program operations; the proportion of 
food stamp caseload affected; and/or the duration of the strike and its 
impact on program operations. Adjustments for these factors may result 
in a waiver of all, part, or none of the error rate liabilities for the 
applicable period. If the Secretary determines that a State agency has 
provided insufficient information or that sufficient information is not 
otherwise available from existing Department records to determine a 
waiver amount for the uncontrollable effects of a strike using factual 
analysis, the Secretary shall determine a waiver amount by using the 
formula described in paragraph (e)(6)(i) (A) of this section. The amount 
of the waiver might be reduced for a strike that was limited to a small 
area of the State.
    (C) Unusual Food Stamp Program caseload growth (for example 15 
percent increase may constitute unusual caseload growth). Caseload 
growth which historically increases during certain periods of the year 
will not be considered unusual or beyond the State agency's control. 
When submitting a request for good cause relief based on this example, 
the State agency shall provide the following information:
    (1) The amount of growth (both actual and percentage);
    (2) The time the growth occurred (what month(s)/year);
    (3) The date(s) after the occurrence when program operations were 
affected;
    (4) The geographic extent of the caseload growth (i.e. Statewide or 
in which particular counties);
    (5) The impact of caseload growth;
    (6) The reason(s) why the State agency was unable to control the 
effects of caseload growth on program administration and errors;
    (7) The percentage of the reported payment error rate that resulted 
from the caseload growth and how this figure was derived; and
    (8) The reported payment error rate in the twelve-month period 
immediately prior to the event and the payment error rate during the 
remainder of the subject fiscal year.

The Secretary shall evaluate the State agency's request and waive any 
portion of the liability which the Secretary attributes to the 
uncontrollable effects of unusual caseload growth. In this evaluation, 
the Secretary will consider the

[[Page 793]]

following factors: Geographical impact of the caseload growth; State 
efforts to control impact on program operations; the proportion of food 
stamp caseload affected; and/or the duration of the caseload growth and 
its impact on program operations. Adjustments for these factors may 
result in a waiver of all, part, or none of the error rate liabilities 
for the applicable period. If the Secretary determines that the State 
agency has provided insufficient information or that needed information 
is otherwise not available from existing Department records to determine 
a waiver amount for the uncontrollable effects of caseload growth using 
factual analysis, the Secretary shall determine a formula derived waiver 
amount by: Counting the number of months out of the six months beginning 
in April immediately prior to the subject review period in which the 
State agency's Food Stamp Program caseloads were 15 percent or more 
above caseloads in March immediately prior to the review period; 
counting the number of months during the twelve months of the review 
period in which the State agency's Food Stamp Program caseloads were 15 
percent or more above caseloads in September prior to the review period; 
determining a waiver amount equal to one eighteenth of the liability for 
each month for the portion of the caseload growth which occurred during 
the six months prior to the fiscal year and one twelfth of the liability 
for each month for the portion of the caseload growth which occurred 
during the fiscal year; and as appropriate, adjust the preliminary 
waiver amount to reflect States' otherwise effective administration of 
the program based upon recent error rate history. For example, a 
reduction in the amount may be made when a State agency's recent error 
rate history indicates that even absent the uncontrollable events 
described, the State agency would have exceeded the error rate tolerance 
for the review period. Under this approach, unless the State agency can 
demonstrate a direct uncontrollable impact on the error rate, FCS will 
not grant relief for the effects of caseload growth that ended prior to 
the second half of the prior fiscal year.
    (D) Unusual changes in the Food Stamp or other Federal or State 
programs that have an uncontrollable effect on the QC payment error 
rate. Requests for relief from errors caused by the uncontrollable 
effects of unusual program changes other than those variances already 
excluded by Sec. 275.12(d)(2)(vii) will be considered. When submitting a 
request for good cause relief based on unusual changes in the Food Stamp 
or other Federal or State programs, the State agency shall provide the 
following information:
    (1) The type of change(s) that occurred;
    (2) When the change(s) occurred;
    (3) The nature of the adverse effect of the changes on program 
operations and the State agency's efforts to mitigate these effects;
    (4) Reason(s) the State agency was unable to adequately handle the 
change(s);
    (5) Identification and explanation of the uncontrollable errors 
caused by the changes (types of errors, geographic location of the 
errors, time period during which the errors occurred, etc.);
    (6) The percentage of the reported payment error rate that resulted 
from the adverse impact of the change(s) and how this figure was 
derived; and
    (7) The reported payment error rate in the twelve-month period 
immediately prior to the event and reported payment error rate during 
the remainder of the subject fiscal year.

The Secretary shall evaluate the State agency's request and waive any 
portion of the liability which the Secretary attributes to the 
uncontrollable effects of unusual changes in the Food Stamp Program or 
other Federal and State programs. In this evaluation, the Secretary will 
consider the following factors: Geographical impact of the unusual 
changes in the Food Stamp Program or other Federal and State programs; 
State efforts to control impact on program operations; the proportion of 
food stamp caseload affected; and/or the duration of the unusual changes 
in the Food Stamp Program or other Federal and State programs and the 
impact on program operations. Adjustments for these factors may result 
in a waiver of all, part, or none of the error

[[Page 794]]

rate liabilities for the applicable period.
    (E) Other unusual circumstances. When submitting a request for good 
cause relief based on unusual circumstances other than those 
specifically set forth in this paragraph (e)(6)(i)(E), such as a fire in 
a certification office, the State agency shall provide the following 
information:
    (1) The unusual circumstances that the State agency believes 
uncontrollably and adversely affected the payment error rate for the 
fiscal year in question;
    (2) Why the State agency had no control over the unusual 
circumstances;
    (3) How the unusual circumstances had an uncontrollable and adverse 
impact on the State agency's error rate;
    (4) Where the unusual circumstances existed (i.e. Statewide or in 
particular counties);
    (5) When the unusual circumstances existed (give as nearly exact 
dates as possible);
    (6) The proportion of the food stamp caseload whose management was 
affected;
    (7) Identification and explanation of the uncontrollable errors 
caused by the event (types of errors, geographic location of the errors, 
time period during which the errors occurred, etc.);
    (8) The percentage of the reported payment error rate that was 
caused by the unusual circumstances and how this figure was derived; and
    (9) The reported payment error rate in the twelve-month period 
immediately prior to the event and reported payment error rate during 
the remainder of the subject fiscal year.

The Secretary shall evaluate the State agency's request and waive any 
portion of the liability which the Secretary attributes to the 
uncontrollable effects of unusual circumstances other than those set 
forth earlier in this paragraph (e)(6)(i)(E). In this evaluation, the 
Secretary will consider the following factors: Geographical impact of 
the unusual circumstances; State efforts to control impact on program 
operations; the proportion of food stamp caseload affected; and/or the 
duration of the unusual circumstances and the impact on program 
operations. Adjustments for these factors may result in a waiver of all, 
part, or none of the error rate liabilities for the applicable period.
    (ii) Adjustments. When good cause is found under the criteria in 
paragraphs (e)(6)(i)(A) through (E) of this section, the Secretary may 
adjust the waiver amount to reflect States' otherwise effective 
administration of the program based upon recent error rate history.
    (iii) Timeframes. State agencies have 60 days from the date of 
receipt of notification by FCS (certified mail, return receipt 
requested) of its final error rate and potential liability to submit 
requests for good cause. In those instances in which FCS uses 
information not submitted by the State agency to make a waiver 
determination or corrects information submitted by the State agency, the 
State agency shall be provided a copy of such information or corrected 
information as set forth in paragraph (e)(6)(iv) of this section and 
shall have 30 days to comment on the supplemental information and/or the 
corrected information before a final decision is rendered. Requests for 
extensions shall be evaluated on a case-by-case basis and only in the 
most unusual situations shall such requests be granted. In computing any 
period of time prescribed or allowed under these procedures, the day of 
delivery of any notice of action, acknowledgment, or reply shall not be 
included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or Federal or State holiday. In 
that case, the period runs until the end of the next day which is not a 
Saturday, Sunday or Federal or State holiday. Requests for good cause or 
an extension of time shall be post-marked prior to the expiration of the 
original due date.
    (iv) Evidence. When submitting a request for good cause relief, the 
State agency shall include such data and documentation as is necessary 
to support and verify the information submitted in accordance with the 
requirements of paragraph (e)(6) of this section so as to fully explain 
how a particular unusual circumstance(s) uncontrollably affected its 
payment error rate.
    (v) Determination. When the Secretary determines that good cause 
exists for a State agency's failure to meet the payment error rate 
tolerance for the fiscal year, the Secretary shall reduce or eliminate 
the State agency's liability

[[Page 795]]

as the Secretary deems is appropriate under the circumstances. When a 
determination is based on information not submitted by a State agency, 
FCS shall issue a preliminary determination (certified mail, return 
receipt requested) on the good cause waiver request. The preliminary 
determination shall identify information used in the evaluation process 
which was not submitted by the State agency or information corrected by 
FCS. State agencies are allowed 30 days from the date of receipt of the 
preliminary determination in which to comment on the supplemental 
information and/or the corrected information. The State agency's 
response shall be limited to the additional information or the corrected 
information used by FCS.
    (vi) Finality. The determinations of the Secretary concerning good 
cause are final and not subject to further administrative or judicial 
review.
    (7) Determination of payment error rates. As specified in 
Sec. 275.3(c), FCS will validate each State agency's estimated payment 
error rate through rereviewing the State agency's active case sample and 
ensuring that its sampling, estimation, and data management procedures 
are correct.
    (i) Once the Federal case reviews have been completed and all 
differences with the State agency have been identified, FCS shall 
calculate regressed error rates using the following linear regression 
equations.
    (A) y<INF>1'=y<INF>1+b<INF>1(X<INF>1-x<INF>1), where y<INF>1' is the 
average value of allotments overissued to eligible and ineligible 
households; y<INF>1 is the average value of allotments overissued to 
eligible and ineligible households in the rereview sample according to 
the Federal finding, b<INF>1 is the estimate of the regression 
coefficient regressing the Federal findings of allotments overissued to 
eligible and ineligible households on the corresponding State agency 
findings, x<INF>1 is the average value of allotments overissued to 
eligible and ineligible households in the rereview sample according to 
State agency findings, and X<INF>1 is the average value of allotments 
overissued to eligible and ineligible households in the full quality 
control sample according to State agency's findings. In stratified 
sample designs Y<INF>1, X<INF>1, and x<INF>1 are weighted averages and 
b<INF>1 is a combined regression coefficient in which stratum weights 
sum to 1.0 and are proportional to the estimated stratum caseloads 
subject to review.
    (B) y<INF>2'=y<INF>2+b<INF>2(X<INF>2-x<INF>2), where y<INF>2' is the 
average value of allotments underissued to households included in the 
active error rate, y<INF>2 is the average value of allotments 
underissued to participating households in the rereview sample according 
to the Federal finding, b<INF>2 is the estimate of the regression 
coefficient regressing the Federal findings of allotments underissued to 
participating households on the corresponding State agency findings, 
x<INF>2 is the average value of allotments underissued to participating 
households in the rereview sample according to State agency findings, 
and X<INF>2 is the average value of allotments underissued to 
participating households in the full quality control sample according to 
the State agency's findings. In stratified sample designs y<INF>2, 
X<INF>2, and x<INF>2 are weighted averages and b<INF>1 is a combined 
regression coefficient in which stratum weights sum to 1.0 and are 
proportional to the estimated stratum caseloads subject to review.
    (C) The regressed error rates are given by r<INF>1'=y<INF>1'/u, 
yielding the regressed overpayment error rate, and r<INF>2'=y<INF>2'/u, 
yielding the regressed underpayment error rate, where u is the average 
value of allotments issued to participating households in the State 
agency sample.
    (D) After application of the adjustment provisions of paragraph 
(e)(7)(iii) of this section, the adjusted regressed payment error rate 
shall be calculated to yield the State agency's payment error rate for 
use in the reduced and enhanced funding determinations described in 
paragraphs (d) and (e) of this section. Prior to Fiscal Year 1986, the 
adjusted regressed payment error rate is given by r<INF>1''. For Fiscal 
Year 1986 and after, the adjusted regressed payment error rate is given 
by r<INF>1''+r<INF>2''.
    (ii) If FCS determines that a State agency has sampled incorrectly, 
estimated improperly, or has deficiencies in its QC data management 
system, FCS will correct the State agency's payment error rate based 
upon a correction to that aspect of the State

[[Page 796]]

agency's QC system which is deficient. If FCS cannot accurately correct 
the State agency's deficiency, FCS will assign the State agency a 
payment error rate based upon the best information available. After 
consultation with the State agency, this assigned payment error rate 
will then be used in the above described liability determination and in 
determinations for enhanced funding under paragraph (d) of this section. 
State agencies shall have the right to appeal assignment of an error 
rate in this situation in accordance with the procedure of Sec. 276.7.
    (iii) Should a State agency fail to complete all of its required 
sample size, FCS shall adjust the State agency's regressed error rates 
using the following equations:
    (A) r<INF>1''=r<INF>1'+2(1-C)S<INF>1, where r<INF>1'' is the 
adjusted regressed overpayment error rate, r<INF>1' is the regressed 
overpayment error rate computed from the formula in paragraph 
(e)(7)(i)(C) of this section, C is the State agency's rate of completion 
of its required sample size expressed as a decimal value, and S<INF>1 is 
the standard error of the State agency sample overpayment error rate. If 
a State agency completes all of its required sample size, then 
r<INF>1''=r<INF>1'.
    (B) r<INF>2''=r<INF>2'+2(1-C)S<INF>2, where r<INF>2'' is the 
adjusted regressed underpayment error rate, r<INF>2' is the regressed 
underpayment error rate computed from the formula in paragraph 
(e)(7)(i)(C) of this section, C is the State agency's rate of completion 
of its required sample size expressed as a decimal value, and S<INF>2 is 
the standard error of the State agency sample underpayment error rate. 
If a State agency completes all of its required sample size, then 
r<INF>2''=r<INF>2'.
    (8) FCS Timeframes. FCS shall notify State agencies of their payment 
error rates and payment error rate liabilities, if any, within nine 
months following the end of each fiscal year reporting period to which 
they pertain. FCS shall initiate collection action on each claim for 
such liabilities before the end of the fiscal year following the end of 
the fiscal year reporting period in which the claim arose unless an 
appeal relating to the claim is pending. Such appeals include 
arbitration cases, requests for good cause waivers, and administrative 
and judicial appeals pursuant to section 14 of the Food Stamp Act. FCS 
is not bound by the timeframes referenced in this subparagraph in cases 
where a State fails to submit QC data expeditiously to FCS and FCS 
determines that, as a result, it is unable to calculate the State's 
payment error rate and payment error rate liability within the 
prescribed timeframe.
    (9) Interest charges. (i) To the extent that a State agency does not 
pay a claim established under Sec. 275.23(e)(4) within 30 days from the 
date on which the bill for collection (after a determination on any 
request for a waiver for good cause) is received by the State agency, 
the State agency shall be liable for interest on any unpaid portion of 
such claim accruing from the date on which the bill for collection was 
received by the State agency. This situation applies unless the State 
agency appeals the claim under Sec. 276.7 of the regulations. If the 
State agency agrees to pay the claim through reduction in Federal 
financial participation for administrative costs, this agreement shall 
be considered to be paying the claim. If the State agency appeals such 
claim (in whole or in part), the interest on any unpaid portion of the 
claim shall accrue from the date of the decision on the administrative 
appeal, or from a date that is 2 years after the date the bill is 
received, whichever is earlier, until the date the unpaid portion of the 
payment is received.
    (ii) If the State agency pays such claim (in whole or in part) and 
the claim is subsequently overturned through administrative or judicial 
appeal, any amounts paid by the State agency above what is actually due 
shall be promptly returned with interest, accruing from the date the 
payment was received until the date the payment is returned.
    (iii) Any interest assessed under this paragraph shall be computed 
at a rate determined by the Secretary based on the average of the bond 
equivalent of the weekly 90-day Treasury bill auction rates during the 
period such interest accrues. The bond equivalent is the discount rate 
(i.e., the price the bond is actually sold for as opposed to its face 
value) determined by the weekly auction (i.e., the difference between 
the

[[Page 797]]

discount rate and face value) converted to an annualized figure. The 
Secretary shall use the investment rate (i.e., the rate for 365 days) 
compounded in simple interest for the period for which the claim is not 
paid. Interest billings shall be made quarterly with the initial billing 
accruing from the date the interest is first due. Because the discount 
rate for Treasury bills is issued weekly, the interest rate for State 
agency claims shall be averaged for the appropriate weeks.
    (10) Suspension and waiver of liabilities for investments in program 
management activities. In connection with the settlement of all or a 
portion of a QC liability for FY 1986 and subsequent QC review periods, 
the Department may suspend and subsequently waive all or part of a State 
agency's payment error rate liability claim based on the State agency's 
offsetting investment in program management activities intended to 
reduce errors measured by the QC system. A State agency may submit a 
request to the Department for review of planned investments in program 
management activities intended to reduce error rates as part of a 
proposed settlement of all or a portion of a QC liability at any time 
during the QC liability claim process.
    (i) The State agency's investment plan activity or activities must 
meet the following conditions to be accepted by the Department:
    (A) The activity or activities must be directly related to error 
reduction in the ongoing program, with specific objectives regarding the 
amount of error reduction, and type of errors that will be reduced. The 
costs of demonstration, research, or evaluation projects under sections 
17 (a) through (c) of the Act will not be accepted. The State agency may 
direct the investment plan to a specific project area or implement the 
plan on a statewide basis. In addition, the Department will allow an 
investment plan to be tested in a limited area, as a pilot project, if 
the Department determines it to be appropriate. A request by the State 
agency for a waiver of existing rules will not be acceptable as a 
component of the investment plan. The State agency must submit any 
waiver request through the normal channels for approval and receive 
approval of the request prior to including the waiver in the investment 
plan. Waivers that have been approved for the State agency's use in the 
ongoing operation of the program may continue to be used.
    (B) The program management activity must represent a new or 
increased expenditure. The proposed activity must also represent an 
addition to the minimum program administration required by law for State 
agency administration including corrective action. Therefore, basic 
training of eligibility workers or a continuing corrective action from a 
Corrective Action Plan shall not be acceptable. The State agency may 
include a previous initiative in its plan; however, the State agency 
would have to demonstrate that the initiative is entirely funded by 
State money, represents an increase in spending and there are no 
remaining Federal funds earmarked for the activity.
    (C) Investment activities must be funded in full by the State 
agency, without any matching Federal funds until the entire investment 
amount agreed to is spent. Amounts spent in excess of the settlement 
amount included in the plan may be subject to Federal matching funds.
    (ii) The request shall include:
    (A) a statement of the amount of money that is a quality control 
liability claim that is to be offset by investment in program 
improvements;
    (B) a detailed description of the planned program management 
activity;
    (C) planned expenditures, including time schedule and anticipated 
cost breakdown;
    (D) anticipated impact of the activity, identifying the types of 
errors expected to be affected;
    (E) documentation that the funds would not replace expenditures 
already earmarked for an ongoing effort; and
    (F) a statement that the expenditures are not simply a reallocation 
of resources.
    (iii) The State's and the Department's agreement to settle all, 
part, or none of the QC liability claim under this paragraph is final 
and not subject to further appeal within the Department. An agreement to 
settle all or

[[Page 798]]

part of a State agency's QC liability claim will result in suspension of 
the claim for the specified amount, pending the State's satisfactory 
completion of the initiative or action taken by the Department under the 
provisions of paragraph (e)(10)(vi) of this section.
    (iv) The State agency shall submit modifications to the plan to the 
Department for approval, prior to implementation. Expenditures made 
prior to approval by the Department may not be used in offsetting the 
liability.
    (v) Each State agency which has all or part of a claim suspended 
under this provision shall submit periodic documented reports according 
to a schedule in its approved investment plan. At a minimum, these 
reports shall contain:
    (A) A detailed description of the expenditure of funds, including 
the source of funds and the actual goods and services purchased or 
rented with the funds;
    (B) A detailed description of the actual activity; and
    (C) An explanation of the activity's effect on errors, including an 
explanation of any discrepancy between the planned effect and the actual 
effect.
    (vi) Any funds that the State agency's reports do not document as 
spent as specified in the investment plan may be withdrawn by the 
Department from the reduction in QC liability. Before the reduction is 
withdrawn, the State agency will be provided an opportunity to provide 
the missing documentation.
    (vii) If the reduction in QC liability is withdrawn, the Department 
shall charge interest on the funds not spent according to the plan, in 
accordance with section 602 of the Hunger Prevention Act of 1988, which 
amended section 13(a)(1) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977.
    (viii) The Department's determination to withdraw a reduction in QC 
liability is not appealable within the Department.


[Amdt. 160, 45 FR 15912, Mar. 11, 1980, as amended by Amdt. 260, 49 FR 
6311, Feb. 17, 1984; Amdt. 262, 49 FR 50598, Dec. 31, 1984. Redesignated 
and amended at 52 FR 3410, Feb. 4, 1987; Amdt. 295, 52 FR 29659, Aug. 
11, 1987; Amdt. 328, 56 FR 60052, Nov. 27, 1991; Amdt. 325, 57 FR 2828, 
Jan. 24, 1992; Amdt. 327, 57 FR 44486, Sept. 28, 1992; 57 FR 47163, Oct. 
14, 1992; Amdt. 348, 59 FR 34561, July 6, 1994]


<R03>
PART 276--STATE AGENCY LIABILITIES AND FEDERAL SANCTIONS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
276.1  Responsibilities and rights.
276.2  State agency liabilities.
276.3  Negligence or fraud.
276.4  Suspension/disallowance of administrative funds.
276.5  Injunctive relief.
276.6  Good cause.
276.7  Administrative review process.

    Authority: 7 U.S.C. 2011-2032.

    Editorial Note: OMB control numbers relating to this part 276 are 
contained in Sec. 271.8.


<R05>
Sec. 276.1  Responsibilities and rights.

    (a) Responsibilities. (1) State agencies shall be responsible for 
establishing and maintaining secure control over coupons and cash for 
which the regulations designate them accountable. Except as otherwise 
provided in these regulations, any shortages or losses of coupons and 
cash shall strictly be a State agency liability and the State agency 
shall pay to FCS, upon demand, the amount of the lost or stolen coupons 
or cash, regardless of the circumstances.
    (2) State agencies shall be responsible for preventing losses or 
shortages of Federal funds in the issuance of benefits to households 
participating in the Program. FCS shall strictly hold State agencies 
liable for all losses, thefts and unaccounted shortages that occur 
during issuance, unless otherwise specified. Issuance functions begin 
with the State agency's creation of a record-for-issuance to generate 
each month's issuances from the master issuance file. Shortages or 
losses which result from any functions that occur prior to the creation 
of the record-for-issuance are subject to either paragraph (a)(3) of 
this section or subpart C--Quality Control (QC) Reviews, of part 275--
Performance Reporting System.
    (3) State agencies shall be responsible for preventing losses of 
Federal funds in the certification of households for participation in 
the Program. If FCS makes a determination that there has been negligence 
or fraud on the part of a State agency in the certification of 
households for participation in the Program, FCS is authorized to bill 
the State agency for an amount

[[Page 799]]

equal to the amount of coupons issued as a result of the negligence or 
fraud.
    (4) State agencies shall be responsible for efficiently and 
effectively administering the Program by complying with the provisions 
of the Act, the regulations issued pursuant to the Act, and the FCS-
approved State Plan of Operation. A determination by FCS that a State 
agency has failed to comply with any of these provisions may result in 
FCS seeking injunctive relief to compel compliance and/or a suspension 
or disallowance of the Federal share of the State agency's 
administrative funds. FCS has the discretion to determine in each 
instance of noncompliance, whether to seek injunctive relief or to 
suspend or disallow administrative funds. FCS may seek injunctive relief 
and suspend or disallow funds simultaneously or in sequence.
    (b) Rights. State agencies may appeal all claims brought against 
them by FCS and shall be afforded an administrative review by a designee 
of the Secretary as provided in Sec. 276.7. State agencies may seek 
judicial review of any final administrative determination made by the 
Secretary's designee, as provided in Sec. 276.7(j).

[54 FR 7016, Feb. 15, 1989]


<R05>
Sec. 276.2  State agency liabilities.

    (a) General provisions. Notwithstanding any other provision of this 
subchapter, State agencies shall be responsible to FCS for any financial 
losses involved in the acceptance, storage and issuance of coupons. All 
coupon issuance shall be documented, and the State agency shall make 
available to the Department all primary documentation (or secondary, if 
the primary has been inadvertently destroyed) when required to do so. 
State agencies shall pay to FCS, upon demand, the amount of any such 
losses. State agencies shall be responsible for the monthly increased 
Federal benefit costs involved in granting households an income 
exclusion for child support payments as described in Sec. 273.9(c)(12). 
State agencies shall reimburse FCS the amount of such increased cost in 
accordance with paragraph (e) of this section.
    (b) Coupon shortages, losses, unauthorized issuances, overissuances 
and undocumented issuances. (1) State agencies shall be strictly liable 
for:
    (i) Coupon shortages and losses that occur any time after coupons 
have been accepted by receiving points within the State and that occur 
during storage or the movement of coupons between bulk storage point 
issuers and claims collection points within the State;
    (ii) Losses resulting from authorization documents lost in transit 
from a manufacturer to the State agency and untransacted authorization 
documents lost in transit from an issuer to the State agency; and
    (iii) The value of coupons overissued and coupons issued without 
authorization, except for those duplicate issuances in the correct 
amount that are the result of replacement issuances made in accordance 
with Sec. 274.6. Overissuances and unauthorized issuances for which 
State agencies are liable include, but are not limited to: Single 
unmatched issuances, duplicates made that are not in accordance with 
Sec. 274.6, and transacted authorization documents that are altered, 
counterfeit, from out-of-State or expired (including those unsigned by 
the designated household member and/or not date stamped by the issuer).
    (2) Coupon shortages and/or losses for which State agencies shall be 
held strictly liable include, but are not limited to, the following:
    (i) Thefts;
    (ii) Embezzlements;
    (iii) Cashier errors (e.g., errors by the personnel of issuance 
offices in the counting of coupon books);
    (iv) Coupons lost in natural disasters if a State agency cannot 
provide reasonable evidence that the coupons were destroyed and not 
redeemed;
    (v) Issuances which cannot be supported by the required 
documentation;
    (vi) Issuances made to households not currently certified;
    (vii) Issuance loss during an official investigation, unless the 
investigation was reported directly to FCS prior to the loss; and
    (viii) Unexplained causes.
    (3) State agencies shall submit written reports on significant 
losses unless those losses were investigated by the Office of the 
Inspector General, USDA.

[[Page 800]]

    (4) A State agency shall be held strictly liable for mail issuance 
losses that are in excess of the tolerance level that corresponds to the 
preselected reporting unit. Each State agency shall select one of the 
three following units annually and report the selection as provided in 
Secs. 272.2(a)(2) and 272.2(d)(1)(iii). Where reporting units issue less 
than $300,000 in mail issuance in a quarter, the State agency shall be 
liable for all losses in excess of $1,500 for the quarter.
    (i) If a State agency elects to report and have liabilities based on 
an existing county or project area level of mail issuance, then the 
State agency shall be strictly liable to FCS for the value of all mail 
issuance losses in excess of five-tenths (.5) percent of the dollar 
value of each reporting unit's quarterly mail issuance. This level shall 
be used if the State agency does not designate one of the three levels 
herein by May 15, 1989, and by August 15 in years thereafter.
    (ii) If a State agency elects to report and have liabilities based 
on an existing administrative level higher than the county or project 
area provided in paragraph (b)(4)(i) of this section, but lower than the 
Statewide level of mail issuance provided in paragraph (b)(4)(iii) of 
this section, then the State agency shall be strictly liable to FCS for 
the value of all mail issuance losses in excess of thirty-five hundreths 
(.35) percent per quarter of the dollar value of each reporting unit's 
quarterly mail issuance. State agencies shall not create new 
administrative units for the sole purpose of reporting mail issuance 
losses.
    (iii) If a State agency elects to report and have liabilities based 
on a State level of mail issuance, then the State agency shall be 
strictly liable to FCS for the value of all mail issuance losses in 
excess of thirty hundreths (.30) percent per quarter of the dollar value 
of each State agency's total quarterly mail issuance.
    (iv) FCS reserves the right to make all determinations on reporting 
requirements and on administrative divisions within the State for the 
purpose of determining and assessing liability for mail issuance losses. 
FCS also reserves the right to revise such determinations as necessary. 
Revisions will be communicated to State agencies by FCS. The liability 
assessment will be based on the revised reporting requirement for the 
next full fiscal quarter.
    (v) For the purpose of this section, ``mail issuance'' means all 
original coupon issuances distributed through the mail. ``Mail loss'' 
means all replacements of mail issuances except for replacements of 
returned mail issuances.
    (vi) The State agency's liability shall be computed using data from 
Form FCS-259, Food Stamp Mail Issuance Report, or alternative reporting 
document accepted in advance by FCS and the State agency, which is 
submitted for the quarter for the particular reporting unit agreed to by 
FCS and the State agency, as provided in Secs. 272.2(a)(2) and 
272.2(d)(1)(iii).
    (5) State agencies shall be held strictly liable for the following 
overissuances:
    (i) The value of overissued coupons issued as a result of a State 
agency's failure to comply with a directive issued by FCS in accordance 
with the provisions of Sec. 271.7, to reduce, suspend or cancel 
allotments;
    (ii) The value of coupons overissued by the State agency as a result 
of a court order or settlement agreement of a court suit which was not 
reported to FCS in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 272.4(e); and
    (iii) The value of coupons overissued as a result of a State agency 
entering into an out-of-court settlement of a court suit, the terms of 
which violate Federal laws or regulations.
    (6) Coupon shortages and losses shall be determined from the Form 
FCS-250, Food Coupon Accountability Report and its supporting documents 
and from the Form FCS-46, Issuance System Reconciliation Report. Losses 
of Federal moneys resulting from overissuances shall be determined from 
sources such as audits, Performance Reporting System Reviews, Federal 
reviews, investigations and explanatory reports prepared by the State 
agency.
    (7) State agencies shall be held strictly liable for overissuances 
resulting from Electronic Benefit Transfer system errors and 
unauthorized account

[[Page 801]]

activities. Such overissuances shall include but not be limited to: 
Overissuances to household accounts that are accessed and used by 
households, replacement benefits to a household's account due to 
unauthorized use of the benefits in a household's account, benefits 
drawn from an EBT account after the household has reported that the EBT 
card is lost or stolen to the State or its agent, overdraft situations 
due to the use of manual back-up procedures approved by the State 
agency, overcredits to a retailer account and transfer of funds to an 
illegitimate account.
    (c) Cash Losses. State agencies are liable to FCS for cash losses 
when money collected by State agencies from recipient claims has been 
lost, stolen or otherwise not remitted to FCS in accordance with the 
provision of Sec. 273.18(h). The amount of such losses shall be 
determined from the sources outlined in paragraph (6) of this section.
    (d) State agency payment to FCS. State agencies shall be billed for 
the exact amount of losses specified in this section. If a State agency 
fails to pay the billing, FCS shall offset the amount of loss from the 
State agency's Letter of Credit in accordance with Sec. 277.16(c).
    (e) Title IV reimbursements. (1) State agencies shall be liable to 
FCS for the increased dollar value of coupon allotments resulting from 
providing households with an income exclusion for child support payments 
as described in Sec. 273.9(c)(12) based on one of the following methods:
    (i) For each month the State agency grants the income exclusion to a 
household, the State agency shall reimburse FCS for the monthly 
difference between the household's benefit level which includes the 
exclusion and the benefit level the household would have received 
without the exclusion.
    (ii) On a monthly basis, State agencies shall total the actual 
amount of income exclusion granted to affected households and shall 
reimburse FCS 30 percent of such total.
    (2) The State agency shall utilize only one reimbursement method and 
that method shall be applied for determining a reimbursement amount for 
all affected cases in the caseload. State agencies may switch from one 
method to the other on an annual basis, but not on a case-by-case basis.
    (3) The State agency shall reimburse FCS through an adjustment to 
the Letter of Credit (LOC) unless it requests or has requested that it 
be allowed to pay by check. The reimbursement amount shall be reported 
quarterly on the Form FCS-209, Status of Claims Against Households, to 
be offset against LOC credit adjustments reported on that form. The 
State agency may request that FCS accept checks from the State for the 
amount due FCS. If a State agency fails to pay FCS the amount due as 
reported on the FCS-209, FCS shall offset the amount due from the State 
agency's Letter of Credit. The State agency shall maintain monthly 
records which detail the computation of reimbursement amounts reported 
on the Form FCS-209 for audit purposes.

[54 FR 7016, Feb. 15, 1989, as amended at 54 FR 51351, Dec. 15, 1989; 57 
FR 11259, Apr. 1, 1992; 57 FR 44791, Sept. 29, 1992; Amdt. 342, 59 FR 
2733, Jan. 19, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 276.3  Negligence or fraud.

    (a) General. If FCS determines that there has been negligence or 
fraud on the part of the State agency in the certification of applicant 
households, the State agency shall, upon demand, pay to FCS a sum equal 
to the amount of coupons issued as a result of such negligence or fraud.
    (b) Negligence provisions. (1) FCS may determine that a State agency 
has been negligent in the certification of applicant households if a 
State agency disregards Food Stamp Program requirements contained in the 
Food Stamp Act, the regulations issued pursuant to the Act, the FCS-
approved State Plan of Operation and a loss of Federal funds results or 
a State agency implements procedures which deviate from food stamp 
requirements contained in the Food Stamp Act, the food stamp 
regulations, the FCS-approved State Plan of Operation without first 
obtaining FCS approval, and the implementation of the procedures results 
in a loss of Federal funds.
    (2) In computing amounts of losses of Federal funds due to 
negligence, FCS

[[Page 802]]

may use actual, documented amounts or amounts which have been determined 
through the use of statistically valid projections. When a statistically 
valid projection is used, the methodology will include a 95 percent, 
one-sided confidence level.
    (3) FCS will base its determinations of negligence on information 
drawn from any of a number of sources. These information sources 
include, but are not limited to, State and Federal Performance Reporting 
reviews, State and Federal audits and investigations, State corrective 
action plans and any required reports.
    (4) Failure by the State agency to remit payment upon demand, within 
the specified time period, may result in FCS recovering the lost funds 
through offsets to the State agency's Letter of Credit, in accordance 
with Sec. 277.16(c).
    (c) Fraud provisions. For purposes of this subsection, the term 
fraud shall mean the wrongful acquisition or issuance of food coupons by 
the State agency or its officers, employees or agents, including 
issuance agents, through false representation or concealment of material 
facts. State agencies shall be liable to FCS for the amount of loss of 
Federal funds as a result of fraud. Failure by the State agency to remit 
payment on demand by FCS, within the time period specified, may result 
in offsets to the Letter of Credit in accordance with Sec. 277.16(c).

[Amdt. 168, 45 FR 77263, Nov. 21, 1980, as amended by Amdt. 262, 49 FR 
50598, Dec. 31, 1984; Amdt. 356, 59 FR 29713, June 9, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 276.4  Suspension/disallowance of administrative funds.

    (a) General provisions. (1) FCS shall make determinations of the 
efficiency and effectiveness of State agencies' administration of the 
Food Stamp Program in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 275.25. 
When making such determinations, FCS shall use all information that is 
available relating to State agencies' administration of the Program. 
This information includes, but is not limited to, information received 
from Performance Reporting System reviews, Federal reviews, audits, 
investigations, corrective action plans, financial management reviews, 
and the public.
    (2) FCS may determine a State agency's administration of the Program 
to be inefficient or ineffective if the State agency fails to comply 
with the food stamp requirements established by the Food Stamp Act, the 
regulations issued pursuant to the Act, or the FCS-approved State Plan 
of Operation.
    (3) If FCS determines that a State agency's administration of the 
Program is inefficient or ineffective, FCS may warn the State agency 
that a suspension and/or disallowance of administrative funds is being 
considered. After a State agency receives a warning, FCS may either 
suspend or disallow administrative funds or take both actions in 
sequence, depending on the statement in the warning.
    (b) Suspension. A suspension of funds is an action by FCS to 
temporarily withhold all or a portion of the Federal share of one or 
more of the cost categories of a State agency's budget for 
administration of the Food Stamp Program. Suspensions of funds shall 
remain in effect until FCS determines that a State agency has taken 
adequate corrective action to correct the problem causing the 
suspension, in which event the suspension will be rescinded, or until 
FCS decides to disallow the suspended funds. FCS shall suspend funds in 
accordance with Sec. 277.16.
    (c) Disallowance. (1) A disallowance of funds is an action by FCS in 
which reimbursement is denied for otherwise reimbursable administrative 
costs claimed by a State agency in one or more of the cost categories of 
a State agency's budget for Program administration.
    (2) In accordance with Sec. 277.16, FCS has the option of 
disallowing funds in another cost category, or all or a portion of the 
entire Letter of Credit if the disallowance is based on a finding that 
the State agency failed to take a required action. FCS may disallow 
funds after previously suspending such funds or may disallow funds 
immediately following the expiration of the formal warning under the 
conditions specified in paragraph (e) of this section.
    (d) Warning process. Prior to taking action to suspend or disallow 
Federal funds, except those funds which are disallowed when a State 
agency fails to

[[Page 803]]

adhere to the cost principles of part 277 and appendix A, FCS shall 
provide State agencies with written advance notification that such 
action is being considered. If a State agency does not respond to such 
an advance notification to the satisfaction of FCS, FCS shall provide 
the State agency with a formal warning of the possibility of suspension 
or disallowance action. However, when a State agency fails to meet the 
objectives in a corrective action plan, FCS may omit the advance 
notification and immediately issue a formal warning.
    (1) Advance notification. Immediately upon becoming aware that a 
deficiency or deficiencies in a State agency's administration of the 
Program may warrant the suspension and/or disallowance of Federal funds, 
FCS shall advise the State agency in writing of the deficiency and shall 
provide a specific period of time for correction of such deficiency or 
deficiencies. The time period allowed the State agency for corrective 
action will vary according to the nature of the deficiency.
    (2) Formal warning. FCS shall issue a formal warning to a State 
agency if the State fails to correct to the satisfaction of FCS the 
deficiencies noted in an advance notification within the time specified 
in the advance notification. FCS may also issue a formal warning to a 
State agency without first issuing an advance notification if a State 
agency fails to comply with a corrective action plan.
    (i) Formal warnings shall include the following information:
    (A) Specific descriptions of the deficiencies, explaining how the 
State agency is out of compliance with Program requirements;
    (B) A Statement as to whether Federal funds will be suspended, 
disallowed or both, if appropriate;
    (C) The amount of Federal funds that will be suspended and/or 
disallowed or an estimate of the amount if actual cost are unavailable; 
and
    (D) A statement of FCS' willingness to assist State agencies is 
resolving the deficiencies.
    (ii) A State agency shall have 30 days from receipt of a formal 
warning to submit evidence that it is in compliance or to submit a 
corrective action proposal, including the date the State agency will be 
in compliance.
    (iii) When the deficiency cannot be corrected within 30 days of 
receipt of a formal warning but the State agency submits an acceptable 
plan for correcting the deficiency, FCS shall hold the formal warning in 
abeyance pending completion of the actions contained in the plan within 
the time specified in the plan.
    (iv) FCS shall cancel a formal warning when the State agency submits 
evidence that shows, to the satisfaction of FCS, that the deficiency has 
been eliminated.
    (e) Suspension/disallowance of funds. The Administrator of FCS shall 
notify State agencies in writing by certified mail or through personal 
service that administrative funds are being suspended or disallowed. 
Such action may occur when any of the following situations arise:
    (1) A State agency fails to respond to the deficiencies cited in a 
formal warning within 30 days of receiving the warning;
    (2) The response by a State agency to the deficiencies cited in a 
formal warning is unsatisfactory to FCS; or
    (3) A State agency fails to meet the commitments it made in its 
corrective action proposal and a formal warning had been held in 
abeyance pending completion of that corrective action.
    (f) Appeals. After FCS has taken action to disallow Federal funds 
the State agency may request an appeal in accordance with the procedures 
specified in Sec. 276.7.

[Amdt. 168, 45 FR 77263, Nov. 21, 1980, as amended by Amdt. 266, 52 FR 
3410, Feb. 4, 1987]


<R05>
Sec. 276.5  Injunctive relief.

    (a) General. If FCS determines that a State agency has failed to 
comply with the Food Stamp Act, the regulations issued pursuant to the 
Act, or the FCS-approved State Plan of Operations, the Secretary may 
seek injunctive relief against the State agency to require compliance. 
The Secretary may request injunctive relief concurrently with negligence 
billings and sanctions against State agencies affecting administrative 
funds.

[[Page 804]]

    (b) Requesting injunctive relief. Prior to seeking injunctive relief 
to require compliance, FCS shall notify the State agency of the 
determination of noncompliance and provide the State agency with a 
specific period of time to correct the deficiency. The Secretary shall 
have the discretion to determine the time periods State agencies will 
have to correct deficiencies. If the State agency does not correct the 
failure within the specified time period and the Department decides to 
seek injunctive relief, the Secretary shall refer the matter to the 
Attorney General with a request that injunctive relief be sought to 
require compliance.

[Amdt. 168, 45 FR 77263, Nov. 21, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 276.6  Good cause.

    (a) When a State agency has failed to comply with provisions of the 
Act, the regulations issued pursuant to the Act, or the FCS-approved 
State Plan of Operation, and, thus, is subject to the suspension/
disallowance and injunctive relief provisions in Secs. 276.4 and 276.5, 
FCS may determine that the State had good cause for the noncompliance. 
FCS shall evaluate good cause in these situations on a case-by-case 
basis, based on any one of the following criteria:
    (1) Natural disasters or civil disorders that adversely affect 
Program operations;
    (2) Strikes by State agency staff;
    (3) Change in the Food Stamp Program or other Federal or State 
programs that result in a substantial adverse impact upon a State 
agency's management of the Program; and
    (4) Any other circumstances in which FCS determines good cause to 
exist.
    (b) If FCS determines that food cause existed for a State agency's 
failure to comply with required provisions and standards, FCS shall not 
suspend or disallow administrative funds nor seek injunctive relief to 
compel compliance with the provisions and standards.

[Amdt. 168, 45 FR 77263, Nov. 21, 1980]


<R05>
Sec. 276.7  Administrative review process.

    (a) General. (1) Whenever FCS asserts a claim against a State 
agency, the State agency may appeal the claim by requesting an 
administrative review. FCS claims that may be appealed are billings 
resulting from financial losses involved in the acceptance, storage, and 
issuance of coupons (Sec. 276.2), billings based on charges of 
negligence or fraud (Sec. 276.3), and disallowances of Federal funds for 
State agency failures to comply with the Food Stamp Act, regulations, or 
the FCS-approved State Plan of Operations (Sec. 276.4).
    (2) A State agency aggrieved by a claim shall have the option of 
requesting a hearing to present its position in addition to a review of 
the record and any written submission presented by the State agency. 
Unless circumstances warrant differently, hearings of appeals of 
negligence claims and disallowances of Federal funds shall be before an 
Appeals Board and hearings of appeals of other claims shall be before a 
single hearing official. In any case, the people reviewing the claim 
shall be people who were not involved in the decision to file the claim.
    (b) Notice of claim. FCS shall provide a notice by certified mail or 
personal service when asserting claims against State agencies.
    (c) Filing an appeal. A State agency aggrieved by claims asserted 
against it may file written appeals with the Secretary, U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, c/o the Executive Secretary, State Food Stamp Appeals 
Board, Food and Consumer Service, USDA, Washington, DC 20250, requesting 
an opportunity to present information in support of its position. The 
State agency shall attach a copy of the FCS claim to its appeal. Appeals 
must be filed with the Executive Secretary or postmarked within 10 days 
of the date of delivery of the notice of claim. If the State agency does 
not appeal within the prescribed 10-day period, the FCS decision on the 
claim shall be final. No extension shall be granted in the time allowed 
for filing an appeal.
    (d) Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed 
or allowed under these procedures, the day of delivery of any notice of 
action, acknowledgment, or reply shall not be included. The last day of 
the period so computed shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday 
or Federal or State holiday. In that case, the period runs until the end 
of the next day which is

[[Page 805]]

not a Saturday, Sunday or Federal or State holiday.
    (e) Stay of administrative action. With one exception, the filing of 
a timely appeal and request for administrative review shall 
automatically stay the action of FCS to collect the claim asserted 
against the State agency until a decision is reached on the 
acceptability of the appeal, and in the case of an acceptable appeal, 
until a final determination has been issued. The exceptions to this 
provision are those claims that are asserted against State agencies due 
to State agency failure to comply with an order to reduce, suspend or 
cancel benefits in accordance with Sec. 271.7. In situations where a 
State agency does not reduce, suspend or cancel benefits as directed and 
FCS takes action to disallow administrative funds or bill the State 
agency, the disallowance and/or billing shall remain in effect during 
the review process. Should the Appeals Board uphold the State agency, 
all disallowed funds and/or funds collected as a result of the billing 
shall be restored to the State agency promptly.
    (f) Acknowledging an appeal. Upon receipt of an appeal and request 
for administrative review, the Executive Secretary shall provide the 
State agency with a written acknowledgment of the appeal, including a 
statement of whether or not the appeal is timely and can be accepted. A 
copy of each acknowledgment shall be provided to FCS. The acknowledgment 
of a timely and acceptable appeal and request for administrative review 
shall also include a copy of Secretary's Memorandum No. 2003, Revised, 
``State Food Stamp Appeals Board,'' and the identity of the Appeals 
Board member(s) designated by the Secretary to review the claim.
    (g) Submitting additional information. (1) State agencies shall have 
30 days from their request for an appeal to submit five sets of the 
following information to the Executive Secretary of the Appeals Board:
    (i) A clear, concise identification of the issue or issues in 
dispute;
    (ii) The State agency's position with respect to the issue or issues 
in dispute;
    (iii) The pertinent facts and reasons in support of the State 
agency's position with respect to the issue or issues in dispute;
    (iv) All pertinent documents, correspondence and records which the 
State agency believes are relevant and helpful toward a more thorough 
understanding of the issue or issues in dispute;
    (v) The relief sought by the State agency;
    (vi) The identity of the person(s) presenting the State agency's 
position when a hearing is involved; and
    (vii) A list of prospective State agency witnesses when a hearing is 
involved.
    (2) At the request of the Executive Secretary, FCS shall promptly 
submit five complete sets of all documents, correspondence and records 
compiled by FCS in support of its claim.
    (3) The Executive Secretary shall provide each person hearing an 
appeal and FCS with a complete set of the State agency information when 
it is received. The Executive Secretary shall also provide each person 
hearing an appeal and the State agency with a complete set of the 
information supplied by FCS when it is received.
    (h) Scheduling and conducting hearings. When a hearing is afforded, 
the Appeals Board or hearing official has up to 60 days from receipt of 
the State agency's information, outlined in paragraph (g) of this 
section, to schedule and conduct the hearing. The Executive Secretary 
shall advise the State agency of the time, date and location of the 
hearing at least 10 days in advance of the hearing. The State agency is 
solely responsible for ensuring the attendance of all State agency 
witnesses at the hearing.
    (1) A hearing is an informal proceeding designed to permit the State 
agency an opportunity to present its position before a neutral third 
party. Because the final determination is subject to judicial review and 
trial de novo, the Appeals Board and hearing official shall not be bound 
by the rules of civil procedure applicable in the court or by the 
adjudicatory requirements of the Administrative Procedures Act.
    (2) The Appeals Board Chairman, his designee or the hearing official 
is the

[[Page 806]]

presiding officer at the hearing. The presiding officer shall have full 
authority to ensure a fair and impartial proceeding, avoid delays, 
maintain order and decorum, receive evidence, examine witnesses, and 
otherwise regulate the course of the hearing. The State agency may 
represent itself at the hearing or be represented by counsel.
    (3) The Appeals Board or hearing official shall receive into 
evidence the oral testimony of State agency witnesses and any documents 
which are relevant and material. Neither the Department nor FCS is 
required to present witnesses at the hearing. However, the Department 
and FCS shall make staff available to provide any information or 
clarification requested by the Appeals Board or hearing official. Under 
no circumstances shall the Department or FCS introduce new evidence at 
the hearing. Departmental and FCS staff, as well as State agency 
witnesses, shall be subject to examination by the Appeals Board or 
hearing official. Departmental and FCS staff shall not be subject to 
cross-examination by State agency representative or counsel. Likewise, 
State agency witnesses shall not be subject to cross-examination by 
Departmental or FCS staff. Each side shall be permitted to make a 
closing statement to the Appeals Board or hearing official upon 
completion of the taking of evidence and testimony.
    (4) FCS and the State agency shall have the opportunity to submit 
additional written information to the Appeals Board or hearing official 
within 10 days after the close of the hearing. No new factual material 
may be introduced except as it directly relates to evidence or testimony 
presented at the hearing. Five complete sets of such information must be 
filed with the Executive Secretary or postmarked prior to the expiration 
of the 10-day deadline for it to be considered.
    (5) An official verbatim transcript of each hearing shall be kept on 
file in the Office of the Executive Secretary for public inspection. A 
copy shall be furnished to FCS and the State agency. Anyone wishing to 
purchase a copy may make arrangements to do so with the commercial 
reporting service involved.
    (i) Final determination. (1) When a hearing is afforded, a final 
determination shall be made within 30 days of the hearing, and the final 
determination shall take effect 30 days after delivery of the notice of 
this final decision to the State agency. When a hearing is not held, a 
final determination shall be made within 30 days after receipt of the 
State agency's information. The final determination shall take effect 30 
days after delivery of the notice of the final decision to the State 
agency.
    (2) The Appeals Board or hearing official shall either uphold the 
claim, deny the claim, or adjust the claim downward in such amounts and 
for such reasons as the Appeals Board or hearing official shall 
determine and declare. The final determination is not subject to 
reconsideration.
    (j) Judicial review. State agencies aggrieved by the final 
determination may obtain judicial review and trial de novo by filing a 
complaint against the United States within 30 days after the date of 
delivery of the final determination, requesting the court to set aside 
the final determination. The final determination shall remain in effect 
during the period the judicial review or any appeal therefrom is pending 
unless the court temporarily stays such administrative action after a 
showing that irreparable injury will occur absent a stay and that the 
State agency is likely to prevail on the merits of the case.
    (k) Extension of time. (1) No extension of time shall be permitted a 
State agency in which to file an initial request for an administrative 
review. All other requests from the State agency or from FCS for the 
extension of any deadline contained in Sec. 276.7 of these regulations 
or imposed by the Appeals Board or hearing official shall be granted 
only for good cause shown and only when received by the Executive 
Secretary before the expiration of the particular deadline involved. All 
requests for an extension shall be in writing. Filing a request for an 
extension stops the running of the prescribed period of time. When a 
request for an extension is granted, the requester shall be notified in 
writing of the amount of additional time granted. When a request is 
denied for being untimely or

[[Page 807]]

for cause, the requester shall be notified and the prescribed period of 
time shall resume from the date of denial.
    (2) The Appeals Board or hearing official may grant itself such 
additional time as it may reasonably require to complete any of its 
assigned responsibilities. If the Appeals Board or hearing official does 
find it necessary to grant itself an extension of time, the Executive 
Secretary shall notify all parties in writing.

[Amdt. 168, 45 FR 77263, Nov. 21, 1980, as amended by Amdt. 274, 51 FR 
18752, May 21, 1986; Amdt. 356, 59 FR 29714, June 9, 1994]


<R03>
PART 277--PAYMENTS OF CERTAIN ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS OF STATE AGENCIES--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
277.1  General purpose and scope.
277.2  Definitions.
277.3  Budgets and budget revision procedures.
277.4  Funding.
277.5  Methods of payment.
277.6  Standards for financial management systems.
277.7  Cash depositories.
277.8  Bonding and insurance.
277.9  Administrative costs principles.
277.10  Program income.
277.11  Financial reporting requirements.
277.12  Retention and custody of records.
277.13  Property.
277.14  Procurement standards.
277.15  Food stamp investigations and prosecutions.
277.16  Suspension, disallowance and program closeout.
277.17  Audit requirements.
277.18  Establishment of an Automated Data Processing (ADP) and 
          Information Retrieval System.
277.19  Alien verification activities.

Appendix A to Part 277--Principles for Determining Costs Applicable to 
          Administration of the Food Stamp Program by State Agencies

    Authority: 7 U.S.C. 2011-2032.

    Source: Amdt. 188, 45 FR 85702, Dec. 30, 1980, unless otherwise 
noted.

    Editorial Note: OMB control numbers relating to this part 277 are 
contained in Sec. 271.8.


<R05>
Sec. 277.1  General purpose and scope.

    (a) Purpose. This part establishes uniform requirements for the 
management of administrative funds provided to State agencies and sets 
forth principles for claiming costs of activities paid with 
administrative funds under the Food Stamp Program, and the Food 
Distribution Program and Food Stamp Program on Indian Reservations.
    (b) Scope and applicability. Upon compliance with the provisions of 
this part, payments to State agencies will be made for cost(s) incurred 
for administration of the Food Stamp Program and for administration of 
the Food Distribution Program on Indian Reservations. To ensure maximum 
practical uniformity, deviation(s) by a State agency from this part may 
be authorized only when necessary to meet program objectives, to 
conserve program funds, or when essential to the public interest. 
However, any deviations from this part must be authorized by the 
Administrator of FCS.


<R05>
Sec. 277.2  Definitions.

    For the purpose of this part the term:
    Accrued expenditures means the charges incurred by the State agency 
during a given period for liabilities incurred, benefits received or for 
goods and services used during this period.
    Accrued income means the net value of earnings during a given period 
resulting from services and goods provided whether or not payment has 
been realized.
    Acquisition cost refers to nonexpendable personal property acquired 
by purchase and means the net invoice price of the property including 
any attachments, accessories or auxiliary apparatus necessary to make 
the property usable for the purpose for which it was acquired. Ancillary 
charges such as taxes, duty, protection in-transit insurance, freight or 
installation shall be included in or excluded from acquisition cost in 
accordance with the State agency's regular accounting practices.
    Approval or authorization by FCS means documentation evidencing 
consent prior to incurring specific costs.
    Applicable credits refer to those receipts or reduction of 
expenditure-type transactions which offset or reduce expense items 
allocable to programs as direct or indirect costs. Examples of such 
transactions are: Purchase discounts; rebates or allowances; recoveries 
or indemnities on losses; sale of

[[Page 808]]

publications, equipment, and scrap; income from personal or incidental 
services; and adjustments of overpayments or erroneous charges.
    Disbursements refers to the transfer of funds by the state agency to 
pay for Program costs resulting from purchased or expired goods and 
services.
    Expendable personal property means all tangible personal property 
other than nonexpendable property.
    Program funds means money, or property provided in lieu of money, 
paid for or furnished by FCS to a State agency.
    Funds available to the State agency may include contributions from 
third parties including other Federal agencies.
    In-kind contributions refers to the value of noncash contributions. 
Only when authorized by Federal legislation may property purchased with 
Federal funds be considered as a State agency's in-kind contribution. 
In-kind contributions may be for the value of real and/or nonexpendable 
personal property or the value of goods and services provided 
specifically to the project or program.
    Nonexpendable personal property means tangible personal property 
having a useful life of more than one year and an acquisition cost of 
more than $300 per unit. A State agency may use its own definition of 
nonexpendable personal property provided that such definition would at 
least include all tangible personal property as defined herein.
    Obligations are the amounts of orders placed, contracts awarded, 
services received, and similar transactions during a given period which 
require payment.
    Offset means a method to recover funds due FCS through use of the 
Letter of Credit system. Recovery is accomplished by accounting 
adjustments to increase Federal funds on hand or disbursed.
    OMB means the Office of Management and Budget.
    Personal property means property of any kind except real property. 
It may be tangible (having physical existence) or intangible (having no 
physical existence) such as patents, inventions and copyrights.
    Program means both the Food Stamp Program and the Food Distribution 
Program on Indian Reservations.
    Program closeout means the process by which FCS determines that all 
applicable administrative and financial processes have been completed by 
the State agency and FCS terminates the program in the affected project 
area or areas.
    Project costs are allowable costs as set forth in this part.
    Real property means land, land improvements, structure and 
appurtenances thereto, excluding movable machinery and equipment.
    State agency means the organization as defined in 7 CFR 271.1.
    State agency costs means the State agency outlays from its funds 
available for program administration. Unless authorized by Federal 
legislation, costs charged to other Federal grants or to other Federal 
contracts may not be considered as State agency costs reimbursable under 
this authority.
    Subagency means the organization or person to which a State agency 
makes any payment for acquisition of goods, materials or services for 
use in administering the program and which is accountable to the State 
agency for the use of funds provided.
    Terms and conditions means legal requirements imposed by the Federal 
Government under statute, regulations, contracts, agreements or 
otherwise.
    Unliquidated obligation represents the amount of obligations not yet 
paid.
    Unobligated balance means the portion of the Federal funds 
authorized less all allowable costs and unpaid obligations of the State 
agency.


<R05>
Sec. 277.3  Budgets and budget revision procedures.

    The preparation, content, submittal, and revision requirements for 
the State Food Stamp Program Budget shall be as specified in Sec. 272.2. 
The application for funds and budget requirements for the Food 
Distribution Program on Indian Reservations shall be as specified in 
Sec. 283.9. State agencies must submit a budget to FCS as part of the 
State Plan each fiscal year. Upon approval of the budget by FCS, 
administrative funds will be provided.

[[Page 809]]


<R05>
Sec. 277.4  Funding.

    (a) General. This section sets allowable cost standards for 
activities of State agencies in administering the Food Stamp Program and 
Food Distribution Program on Indian Reservations.
    (b) Federal reimbursement rate. The base percentage for Federal 
payment shall be 50 percent of State agencies' allowable Food Stamp 
Program administrative costs.
    (1) A 75 percent Federal reimbursement is payable for Food Stamp 
Program allowable costs incurred for State fraud investigations, 
prosecutions, and fraud hearings upon presentation and approval of a 
State Plan addendum as outlined in Sec. 277.15.
    (2) A State agency's federally funded share of Food Stamp Program 
administrative costs shall be increased when its error rate, as 
determined through the quality control process described in part 275, 
meets certain standards.
    (i) For the period beginning October 1, 1982, through September 30, 
1988, a State agency with a payment error rate of five percent or less 
in the corresponding fiscal year shall have its federally funded share 
of Program administrative costs increased to 60 percent, provided that 
the State agency's negative case error rate is less than the national 
weighted mean negative case rate for the fiscal year prior to the period 
of enhanced funding.
    (ii) For the period beginning October 1, 1988, and review periods 
thereafter, a State agency with a payment error rate less than or equal 
to 5.90 percent and with a negative case error rate less than the 
National weighted mean negative case error rate for the prior fiscal 
year shall have its Federally funded share of Food Stamp Program 
administrative costs increased by one percentage point to a maximum of 
60 percent for each full one-tenth of a percentage point by which the 
payment error rate is less than six percent.
    (3) Funding of demonstration projects approved by FCS will be at a 
rate agreed to by FCS in accordance with the requirements outlined in 
part 282.
    (4) The reimbursement of administrative costs to State agencies 
administering the program on Indian reservations shall be in accordance 
with the requirements of parts 281 and 283.
    (5) For the period beginning October 1, 1980, a State agency's 
federally funded share of Food Stamp Program administrative costs shall 
be increased to 65 percent when the State agency's cumulative allotment 
error rate is less than five percent; provided that the State agency's 
negative case error rate is less than the national weighted mean 
negative case error rate for the 6-month period of enhanced funding. 
This provision shall not apply to any period after the April through 
September 1982 period.
    (6) For the period beginning October 1, 1980, a State agency's 
federally funded share of Food Stamp Program administrative costs shall 
be increased to 60 percent when the State agency's cumulative allotment 
error rate is less than eight percent; provided that the State agency's 
negative case error rate is less than the national weighted mean 
negative case error rate for the 6-month period of enhanced funding. 
This provision shall not apply to any period after the April through 
September 1982 period.
    (7) For the 6-month period beginning October 1, 1980, a State agency 
with a 25 percent or greater reduction in its cumulative allotment error 
rate from one 6-month period to the comparable period of the next fiscal 
year shall be entitled to a 55 percent federally funded share of Food 
Stamp Program administrative costs; provided that, effective with the 6-
month period beginning October 1, 1981, the State agency's negative case 
error rate is less than the national weighted mean negative case error 
rate for the period of enhanced funding. This provision shall not apply 
to any period after the April through September 1982 period.
    (8) Beginning October 1982, the federally funded share of 
administrative costs, as identified in paragraph (b) of this section may 
be decreased based upon its payment error rate as described in 
Sec. 275.23. The rates of Federal funding for the activities identified 
in paragraphs (b) (1), (3), and (4) of this section shall not be reduced 
based upon the agency's payment error rate.

[[Page 810]]

    (9) Employment and training program grants, as outlined in 
Sec. 273.7(f) shall be 100 percent federally-funded.
    (10) A 100 percent Federal Financial Participation rate shall be 
available for costs incurred in the verification of the documented alien 
status of FSP applicants through the Systematic Alien Verification for 
Entitlements (SAVE) Program. The charges must be contained in a budget 
or budget revisions approved by FCS and follow the allowability 
provisions found in Sec. 277.19.
    (11) A 63 percent Federal reimbursement is payable for Food Stamp 
Program allowable costs incurred for State agency planning, designing, 
developing, and installing of computerized systems as described in 
Sec. 277.18 and approved for enhanced funding by FCS after September 30, 
1991.
    (12) A 75 percent Federal reimbursement is payable for Food Stamp 
Program allowable costs incurred for State agency planning, designing, 
developing, and installing of computerized systems as described in 
Sec. 277.18 and submitted for approval for enhanced funding by FCS 
before November 28, 1990. Those proposals, including modifications and 
cost increases, which received approval at the 75 percent level during 
the period from November 28, 1990 through September 30, 1991, shall be 
reimbursed at the 75 percent rate for costs incurred through September 
30, 1991, and at the 63 percent rate for costs incurred thereafter. All 
modifications approved after September 30, 1991 and any cost increases 
which occur after this date shall be reimbursed at 63 percent regardless 
of when the original system was approved. For purposes of this 
paragraph, no system shall be funded at 75 percent unless all required 
paperwork for enhanced funding is (or was) either approved by FCS prior 
to the appropriate date contained in this paragraph or a planning 
advance planning document (PAPD) was approved and an implementation 
advance planning document (IAPD) was submitted with all the required 
paperwork for enhanced funding to FCS prior to November 28, 1990. The 
required paperwork is described in Sec. 277.18.
    (c) Matching costs. State agency costs for Federal matching funds 
may consist of:
    (1) Charges reported on a cash or accrual basis by the State agency 
as project costs.
    (2) Project costs financed with cash contributed or donated to the 
State agency by other non-Federal public agencies and institutions.
    (3) Project costs represented by services and real or personal 
property donated by other non-Federal public agencies and institutions.
    (d) All cash or in-kind contributions except as provided in 
paragraph (e) of this section shall be allowable as part of the State 
agency's share of program costs when such contributions:
    (1) Are verifiable;
    (2) Are not contributed for another federally-assisted program, 
unless authorized by Federal legislation;
    (3) Are necessary and reasonable for accomplishment of project 
objectives;
    (4) Are charges that would be allowable under this part;
    (5) Are not paid by the Federal Government under another assistance 
agreement unless authorized under the other agreement and its subject 
laws and regulations; and
    (6) Are in the approved budget.
    (e) The value of services rendered by volunteers or the value of 
goods contributed by third parties, exclusive of the State and Federal 
agencies, are unallowable for reimbursement purposes under the Food 
Stamp Program. The value of services rendered by volunteers shall be 
allowable only to meet any matching administrative costs requirements 
for the Food Distribution Program on Indian Reservations.
    (f) The expenses (e.g. travel, lodging, meals) of persons working 
with volunteer or nonprofit organizations which receive training and 
assistance pursuant to Sec. 272.4(d)(2) are not allowable.

[Amdt. 188, 45 FR 85702, Dec. 30, 1980, as amended by Amdt. 201, 47 FR 
25498, June 11, 1982; Amdt. 260, 49 FR 6313, Feb. 17, 1984; Amdt. 281, 
51 FR 47397, Dec. 31, 1986; 53 FR 39443, Oct. 7, 1988; Amdt. 316, 54 FR 
24531, June 7, 1989; Amdt. 328, 56 FR 60053, Nov. 27, 1991; Amdt. 342, 
59 FR 2733, Jan. 19, 1994; Amdt. 316, 59 FR 16096, Apr. 6, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 277.5  Methods of payment.

    (a) This section sets forth FCS methods for authorizing funds for 
State agencies.

[[Page 811]]

    (b) The ``Letter of Credit'' (LOC) (SF-1193A) is the document by 
which an official of FCS authorizes a State agency to draw funds from 
the United States Treasury. This shall be the preferred method of 
payment for State agencies which receive at least $120,000 per year and 
meet the requirements prescribed in OMB Circular A-102, Attachment J.
    (c) State agencies shall request payment(s) by submitting Request 
for Payment on Letter of Credit and Status of Funds Report (Treasury 
Form SF-183) to the appropriate United States Treasury Regional 
Disbursing Office with a copy to FCS.
    (d) State agencies not meeting the requirements for the LOC method 
of payment or failing to meet LOC reporting requirements, including 
those requiring adjustments to cash balances to liquidate amounts owed 
to FCS, shall be provided funds by Treasury check in accordance with the 
provisions of Department of the Treasury Circular 1075.
    (e) Payments for proper charges incurred by State agencies will not 
be withheld unless such payments are suspended or disallowed pursuant to 
Sec. 277.16. When a payment is withheld, payment adjustments will be 
made in accordance with Sec. 277.16. When FCS collects an indebtedness, 
whether due to a disallowance or an offset for amounts which the State 
agency has been billed but which it has failed to pay without cause 
acceptable to FCS, FCS shall provide reasonable notice to the State 
agency, and shall require appropriate accounting adjustment to cash 
balances for which the State agency is accountable to the Federal 
government to liquidate the indebtedness.


<R05>
Sec. 277.6  Standards for financial management systems.

    (a) General. This section prescribes standards for financial 
management systems in administering program funds by the State agency 
and its subagencies or contractors.
    (b) Responsibilities. Financial management systems for program funds 
in the State agency shall provide for:
    (1) Accurate, current, and complete disclosure of the financial 
results of program activities in accordance with Federal reporting 
requirements.
    (2) Records which identify the source and application of funds for 
FCS or State agency activities supporting the administration of the 
Program. These records shall show authorizations, obligations, 
unobligated balances, assets, liabilities, outlays and income of the 
State agency, its sub- agencies and agents.
    (3) Records which identify unallowable costs and offsets resulting 
from FCS or other determinations as specified in Sec. 277.16 and the 
disposition of these amounts. Accounting procedures must be in effect to 
prevent a State agency from claiming these costs under ongoing program 
administrative cost reports.
    (4) Effective control and accountability by the State agency for all 
program funds, property, and other assets acquired with program funds. 
State agencies shall adequately safeguard all such assets and shall 
assure that they are used solely for program authorized purposes unless 
disposition has been made in accordance with Sec. 277.13.
    (5) Controls which minimize the time between the receipt of Federal 
funds from the United States Treasury and their disbursement for program 
costs. In the Letter of Credit system, the State agency shall make 
drawdowns from the U.S. Treasury through a U.S. Treasury Regional 
Disbursing Office as nearly as possible to the time of making the 
disbursements.
    (6) Procedures to determine the reasonableness, allowability, and 
allocability of costs in accordance with the applicable provisions 
prescribed in appendix A to this part.
    (7) Support and source documents for costs.
    (8) An audit trail including identification of time periods, initial 
and summary accounts, cost determination and allocation procedures, cost 
centers or other accounting procedures to support any costs claimed for 
program administration.
    (9) Periodic audits by qualified individuals who are independent of 
those who maintain Federal program funds as prescribed in Sec. 277.17.
    (10) Methods to resolve audit findings and recommendations and to 
follow up on corrective or preventive actions.

[[Page 812]]

    (c) The standards in Sec. 277.6(b) apply to subagencies or 
contractors involved with program funding.


<R05>
Sec. 277.7  Cash depositories.

    (a) The term ``cash depositories'' refers to banks or other 
institutions which maintain accounts where Food Stamp Program funds are 
deposited and from which withdrawals are made to meet administrative 
costs of the State agency.
    (b) State agencies are encouraged to use minority owned banks to 
expand opportunities for minority enterprises.
    (c) FCS shall not:
    (1) Require physical segregation in a cash depository of program 
funds from other State agency funds.
    (2) Establish any eligibility requirements for cash depositories in 
which program funds are deposited by the State agency.


<R05>
Sec. 277.8  Bonding and insurance.

    (a) General. In administering FCS program funds, State agencies 
shall observe their regular requirements and practices with respect to 
bonding and insurance. FCS will not impose additional bonding and 
insurance requirements, including fidelity bonding, above those normally 
required by the State agency.
    (b) Loan guarantees. FCS makes no guarantee of any loan or payment 
of money borrowed by a State agency for administering the program. State 
agencies shall not make any assurances to any lender or contractor that 
FCS will furnish funds for loan payments.


<R05>
Sec. 277.9  Administrative costs principles.

    (a) This section prescribes specific policies and procedures 
governing State agencies for funding under this part.
    (b) Any cost related to determining the Food Stamp eligibility of 
AFDC cases shall be included as part of the AFDC determination costs and 
claims. They are not allowable costs for FCS reimbursement.
    (c) When costs for administering the program are claimed for 
reimbursement, the audit trail must identify the specific activities, 
locations, or time periods as defined in this section.
    (1) Direct cost. Allowable direct costs may be charged to the Food 
Stamp Program at the 50 percent or higher funding level as specified in 
this part.
    (2) Indirect cost. Allowable indirect costs may also be claimed at 
the 50 percent or higher reimbursement funding level as specified in 
this part and appendix A.
    (3) Direct and indirect costs claimed for program cost reimbursement 
must be incurred for the time periods, the activities or for the 
locations for which the rates are approved by FCS.
    (d) All State agency Cost Allocation Plans for determining the costs 
of administering the program must be approved by the cognizant Federal 
agency. All Cost Allocation Plans involving program funds shall be 
submitted to FCS for review.


<R05>
Sec. 277.10  Program income.

    (a) Program income is gross income resulting from activities 
financed with program funds. Such earnings exclude interest income but 
include income from service fees, usage or rental fees, sale of assets 
purchased with program funds, and royalties on patents and copyrights.
    (b) Interest earned on advances of program administrative funds 
shall be remitted to FCS except for interest earned on advances to 
States or instrumentalities of a State as provided by the 
Intergovernmental Cooperation Act of 1968 (Pub. L. 90-577) and advances 
to tribal organizations under the Indian Self-Determination Act 
(sections 102 through 104).
    (c) Income resulting from the sale of real and personal property 
whose acquisition cost was borne in whole or in part with Program funds 
shall be remitted to FCS or applied to the Federal share of current 
program costs in accordance with Sec. 277.13. All other sales proceeds 
will be handled in accordance with Sec. 277.13.
    (d) Unless there is a prior agreement between FCS and the State 
agency, the State agency shall have no obligation to FCS with respect to 
royalties received from copyrights or patents produced as a result of 
activities financed with program administrative funds.

[[Page 813]]

    (e) Any other income earned under activities supported by program 
administrative funds may be retained by the State agency if they are 
deducted from the gross program administrative costs for the purposes of 
determining net costs and FCS's share of net cost.
    (f) State agencies shall record the receipt and expenditure of 
revenues such as taxes, special assessments, levies, fines, etc., as a 
part of program fund transactions when such revenues are specifically 
earmarked for program fund projects.


<R05>
Sec. 277.11  Financial reporting requirements.

    (a) General. This section prescribes requirements for the State 
agencies to report financial information to FCS.
    (b) Authorized forms and instructions. (1) Only forms specified by 
this part, or other forms authorized by FCS, may be used for obtaining 
financial information from State agencies for the program.
    (2) All instructions for use in connection with the form specified 
in Sec. 277.11(c) shall be followed. FCS may prescribe supplementary 
instructions.
    (3) State agencies shall submit the original and two copies of forms 
required by this section unless FCS approves a waiver of this 
requirement.
    (4) The forms and instructions in this part shall be available to 
the State agency and to the public upon request to FCS Regional Offices 
as set out in Sec. 271.6(b).
    (c) Financial status report--(1) Form. State agencies shall use the 
standard Financial Status Report (Form SF-269) to report program costs.
    (2) Freqency. The report (Form SF-269) shall be required quarterly.
    (3) Exceptions. Those State agencies that receive payments under the 
U.S. Treasury check system shall submit to FCS a Quarterly Report of 
Federal Cash Transactions (Form SF-272).
    (4) Due dates. Quarterly reports shall be due April 30 (for the 
period January through March), July 30 (April through June), October 30 
(July through September), January 30 (October through December). Final 
reports are due December 30 for all completed Federal fiscal years 
(October 1 through September 30) or 90 days after termination of Federal 
financial support. Requests from State agencies for extension of 
reporting due dates may be approved, if necessary.


<R05>
Sec. 277.12  Retention and custody of records.

    (a) Retention period. All financial records, supporting documents, 
statistical records, negotiated contracts, and all other records 
pertinent to program funds shall be maintained for three years from the 
date of submission of the annual financial status report of the relevant 
fiscal year to which they apply except that:
    (1) If any litigation, claim, or audit is started before the 
expiration of the three-year period, the applicable records shall be 
retained until these have been resolved.
    (2) In the case of a payment by a State agency to a subagency or 
contractor using program funds, the State agency, USDA, the Comptroller 
General of the United States, or any of their duly authorized 
representatives, shall have access to any book, documents, papers and 
records of the subagency or contractor which the State agency, USDA, or 
the Comptroller General of the United States or any of their duly 
authorized representatives, determine are pertinent to administration of 
the specific FCS program funds, for the purpose of making audit, 
examination, excerpts, and transcripts.
    (b) Restrictions on public access. Unless required by laws, FCS will 
not place restrictions on State agencies which limit public access to 
their records or the records of their subagencies or contractors that 
are pertinent to the administrative funding provided by FCS except when 
the State agency can demonstrate that such records must be kept 
confidential and would have been excepted from disclosure pursuant to 
the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552) if the records had 
belonged to FCS.


<R05>
Sec. 277.13  Property.

    (a) General. This section prescribes policies and procedures 
governing title, use, disposition of real and personal property for 
which acquisition costs

[[Page 814]]

were borne, in whole or in part, as a direct charge to FCS funds, and 
ownership rights or intangible personal property developed, in whole or 
in part, with FCS funds. State agencies may follow their own property 
management policies and procedures provided they observe the 
requirements of this section. With respect to property covered by this 
section, FCS may not impose on State agencies any requirement (including 
property reporting requirements) not authorized by this section unless 
specifically required by Federal laws.
    (b) Nonexpendable personal property--(1) Title. Title to 
nonexpendable personal property whose acquisition cost is borne, in 
whole or in part, by FCS shall vest in the State agency upon 
acquisition, and shall be subject to the restrictions on use and 
dispositions set forth in this section.
    (2) Use. (i) The State agency shall use the property in the program 
as long as there is a need for such property to accomplish the purpose 
of the program.
    (ii) When there is no longer a need for the property to accomplish 
the purpose of the program, the State agency shall use the property 
where needed in administration of other programs in the following order 
of priority:
    (A) Other federally-funded programs of FCS.
    (B) Other federally-funded programs of USDA.
    (C) Other federally-funded programs.
    (iii) When the State agency no longer has need for such property in 
any of its federally financed activities, the property may be used for 
the State agency's own official activities in accordance with the 
following standards:
    (A) If the property had a total acquisition cost of less than 
$1,000, the State agency may use the property without reimbursement to 
FCS.
    (B) For all such property not covered under paragraph (b)(2)(iii)(A) 
of this section, the State agency may retain the property for its own 
use, provided a fair compensation is made to FCS for the FCS share of 
the property. The amount of compensation shall be computed by applying 
the percentage of FCS participation in the cost of the property to the 
current fair market value of the property.
    (3) Disposition. If the State agency has no need for the property, 
disposition of the property shall be made as follows:
    (i) If the property had a total acquisition cost of less than $1,000 
per unit, the State agency may sell the property and retain the 
proceeds.
    (ii) If the property had an acquisition cost of $1,000 or more per 
unit, the State agency shall:
    (A) If instructed to ship the property elsewhere, the State agency 
shall be reimbursed with an amount which is computed by applying the 
percentage of the State agency's participation in the cost of the 
property to the current fair market value of the property, plus any 
shipping or interim storage costs incurred.
    (B) If instructed to otherwise dispose of the property, the State 
agency shall be reimbursed by FCS for the cost incurred in such 
disposition.
    (C) If disposition or other instructions are not issued by FCS 
within 120 days of a request from the State agency, the State agency 
shall sell the property and reimburse FCS an amount which is computed by 
applying the percentage of FCS participation in the cost of the property 
to the sales proceeds. The State agency may, however, deduct and retain 
from FCS's share $100 or 10 percent of the proceeds, whichever is 
greater, for the State agency selling and handling expenses.
    (c) Transfer of title to certain property. (1) Where FCS determines 
that an item of nonexpendable personal property with an acquisition cost 
of $1,000 or more which is to be wholly borne by FCS is unique, 
difficult, or costly to replace, FCS may reserve the right to require 
the State agency to transfer title of the property to the Federal 
Government or to a third party named by FCS.
    (2) Such reservation shall be subject to the following:
    (i) The right to require transfer of title may be reserved only by 
means of an expressed special condition under which funds were 
authorized for acquisition of the property, or, if approval for the 
acquisition of the property is given after the funds are awarded, by 
means of a written stipulation at the time such approval is given.

[[Page 815]]

    (ii) The property must be sufficiently described to enable the State 
agency to determine exactly what property is involved.
    (3) FCS may not exercise the right to reserve until the State agency 
no longer needs the property in the activity for which it was acquired. 
Such need shall be assumed to end with termination of the activity in 
which the property was used unless the State agency continues to use the 
property in other program-related activities after the termination date 
and demonstrates to FCS a continued need for such use in the program.
    (4) To exercise the right, FCS must issue disposition instructions 
to the State agency not later than 120 days after the State agency no 
longer needs the property in the activity for which it was acquired. If 
instructions are not issued within that time, FCS's right shall lapse, 
and the State agency shall act in accordance with the applicable 
standards in paragraphs (b)(2) and (b)(3) of this section.
    (5) The State agency shall be entitled to reimbursement with an 
amount which is computed by applying the percentages of the State 
agency's participation in the acquisition cost of the property to the 
current fair market value of the property, and for any reasonable 
shipping and interim storage costs it incurs pursuant to FCS's 
disposition instructions.
    (d) Property management standards. State agencies' property 
management standards for nonexpendable personal property covered by this 
section shall include the following procedural requirements:
    (1) Property records shall be maintained accurately and provide for:
    (i) A description of the property.
    (ii) Manufacturer's serial number or other identification number.
    (iii) Acquisition date and cost.
    (iv) Source of the property.
    (v) Percentage of FCS funds used in the acquisition of the property, 
or sufficient information to be able to compute the percentage, if and 
when the property is disposed of.
    (vi) Location, use and condition of the property.
    (vii) Ultimate disposition data including sales price or the method 
used to determine current fair market value if the State agency 
reimburses FCS for its share.
    (viii) Trade-in value of any property purchased with Federal funds 
where their trade-in value reduces the acquisition cost of new property.
    (2) A physical inventory of property shall be taken and the results 
reconciled with the property records at least once every two years to 
verify the existence, current utilization, and continued need for the 
property.
    (3) A control system shall be in effect to ensure adequate 
safeguards to prevent loss, damage, or theft to the property. Any loss, 
damage, or theft of nonexpendable personal property shall be 
investigated and properly documented.
    (4) Adequate maintenance procedures shall be implemented to keep the 
property in good condition.
    (5) Proper sales procedures shall be implemented to keep the 
property in good condition.
    (e) Expendable personal property--(1) Title. Title to expendable 
personal property, whose acquisition cost was borne in whole or in part 
by FCS, shall vest in the State agency.
    (2) Use. The State agency shall use the property in the program as 
long as there is a need for such property to accomplish the purpose of 
the program.
    (3) Disposition. When there is no longer a need for the property in 
the program and there is a residual inventory exceeding $1,000 the State 
agency shall:
    (i) Use the property in other federally sponsored projects or 
programs;
    (ii) Retain the property for use on non-federally sponsored 
activities; or,
    (iii) Sell it.
    (4) Compensation. FCS must be compensated for its share if the 
alternative in paragraph (e)(3)(i) of this section is not followed. The 
amount of compensation shall be computed in the same manner as for 
nonexpendable personal property.
    (f) Patents and inventions. If any program activity produced 
patents, patent rights, processes or inventions in the course of work 
aided by FCS, such fact shall be promptly and fully reported to FCS. 
Unless there is prior agreement between the State agency and FCS on

[[Page 816]]

disposition of such items, FCS shall determine whether protection on 
such invention or discovery shall be sought and how the rights in the 
invention or discovery--including rights under any patent issued 
thereon--shall be disposed of and administered in order to protect the 
public interest consistent with ``Government Patent Policy'' 
(President's Memorandum for Heads of Excecutive Departments and 
Agencies, August 23, 1971), and State of Government Patent Policy as 
printed in title 37 CFR, chapters I and II.
    (g) Copyrights. When a program activity results in a book or other 
copyrightable materials, the author or State agency is free to copyright 
the work, but FCS reserves a royalty-free, nonexclusive and irrevocable 
right to reproduce, publish or otherwise use and to authorize others to 
use the work for government purposes. This includes copyrights on ADP 
software as specified in appendix A.


<R05>
Sec. 277.14  Procurement standards.

    (a) General. This section establishes standards and guidelines for 
the procurement of supplies, equipment, construction and other services 
whose cost is borne in whole or in part by FCS program funds. These 
standards ensure that such materials are obtained in an effective and 
economical manner and in compliance with the provisions of applicable 
Federal law and Executive orders. No additional procurement standards 
will be imposed by FCS upon State agencies unless specifically required 
by Federal law, or Executive orders, or authorized by the Administrator 
for Federal Procurement Policy, Office of Management and Budget.
    (1) These standards do not relieve the State agency of any 
contractual responsibilities under its contracts. The State agency is 
responsible, in accordance with good administrative practice and sound 
business judgment, for the settlement of all contractual and 
administrative issues arising out of procurements entered into in 
support of the program. These include but are not limited to sources 
evaluations, protests, disputes and claims. FCS shall not substitute its 
judgment for that of the State agency unless the matter is primarily a 
Federal concern. Violations of laws shall be referred to the local, 
State or Federal authority having jurisdiction.
    (2) State agencies shall use their own procurement procedures 
provided that procurements paid in whole or in part with FCS program 
funds meet the standards set forth in this part.
    (b) Review of proposed contracts. State agencies shall submit 
proposed contracts and related procurement documents to FCS for preaward 
review and approval when:
    (1) The procurement is expected to exceed $10,000 and is to be 
awarded without competition or only one bid or offer is received in 
response to solicitation;
    (2) The procurement expected to exceed $10,000 specifies a ``brand 
name'' product; or
    (3) FCS has determined that the State agency's procurement 
procedures or operation fails to comply with one or more significant 
aspects of this section.
    (c) Code of conduct. The State agency shall maintain a written code 
or standards of conduct which shall govern the performance of its 
officers, employees, or agents engaged in the award and administration 
of contracts borne in whole or in part with FCS program funds. No 
employee, officer, or agent of the State agency shall participate in the 
selection, or in the award or administration of a contract supported in 
whole or in part by FCS program funds if a conflict of interest, real or 
apparent, would be involved. Such conflict would arise when:
    (1) The employee, officer, or agent;
    (2) Any member of his/her immediate family;
    (3) His or her partner; or
    (4) An organization which employs, or is about to employ, any of the 
above, has a financial or other interest in the firm selected for award. 
The State agency's officers, employees, or agents shall neither solicit 
nor accept gratuities, favors, or anything of monetary value from 
contractors, potential contractors, or parties to subagreements. State 
agencies may set minimum rules where the financial interest is not 
substantial or the gift is an unsolicited item of nominal intrinsic 
value. To the extent permitted by

[[Page 817]]

State or local law or regulations, such standards of conduct shall 
provide for penalties, sanctions, or other disciplinary actions for 
violations of such standards by the State agency's officers, employees, 
or agents, or by contractors or their agents.
    (d) Procurement procedures. The State agency shall establish 
procurement procedures which provide that proposed procurement actions 
shall be reviewed by State agency officials to avoid the purchase of 
unnecessary or duplicative items. Consideration should be given to 
consolidation or dividing the purchase into smaller units, to obtain a 
more economical purchase. Where appropriate, an analysis shall be made 
of lease versus purchase alternatives, and any other appropriate 
analyses, to determine which approach would be the most economical. To 
foster greater economy and efficiency, State agencies are encouraged to 
enter into State and local intergovernmental agreements for procurement 
or use of common goods and services.
    (e) Contracting with small and minority firms, women's business 
enterprises and labor surplus area firms. (1) It is FCS policy to award 
a fair share of contracts to small and minority business firms. State 
agencies must take affirmative steps to assure that small and minority 
businesses are utilized when possible as sources of supplies, equipment, 
construction and services. State agency affirmative steps shall include 
the following:
    (i) Including qualified small and minority businesses on 
solicitation lists.
    (ii) Assuring that small and minority businesses are solicited 
whenever they are potential sources.
    (iii) When economically feasible, dividing total requirements into 
smaller tasks or quantities so as to permit maximum small and minority 
business participation.
    (iv) Where the requirement permits, establishing delivery schedules 
which will encourage participation by small and minority business.
    (v) Using the services and assistance of the Small Business 
Administration, the Office of Minority Business Enterprise of the 
Department of Commerce and the Community Services Administration, as 
appropriate.
    (vi) If any subcontracts are to be let, requiring the prime 
contractor to take the affirmative steps in paragraphs (e)(1) (i) 
through (v) of this section.
    (2) State agencies shall take similar appropriate affirmative action 
in support of women's business enterprises.
    (3) State agencies are encouraged to procure goods and services from 
labor surplus areas, as defined by the Department of Labor.
    (4) FCS shall impose no additional regulations or requirements in 
the foregoing areas unless specifically mandated by law or Executive 
order.
    (f) Selection procedures. All State agency procurement transactions 
shall be conducted in a manner that provides maximum open and free 
competition with this section. Procurement procedures shall not contain 
features which restrict or eliminate competition. The State agency shall 
have written selection procedures which shall provide, as a minimum, the 
following procedural requirements:
    (1) Solicitation of offers, whether by competitive sealed bid or 
competitive negotiation, shall contain a clear and accurate description 
of the technical requirements for the material, product, or service 
desired. Descriptions shall not, in competitive procurements, contain 
features which unduly restrict competition. Descriptions may include a 
statement of the qualitative nature of the material, product or service 
desired and, when necessary, shall set forth those minimum essential 
characteristics and standards to which it must conform if it is to 
satisfy its intended use. When it is impractical or uneconomical to 
describe clearly and accurately the technical requirements, a ``brand 
name or equal'' description may be used to define the performance or 
requirements of the material, product or service desired. The specific 
features of the named brand which must be met by offerors shall be 
clearly stated. State agencies shall clearly set forth all requirements 
which offerors must fulfill and all other factors to be used in 
evaluating bids or proposals.
    (2) State agencies shall make awards only to responsible contractors 
that possess the potential ability to perform

[[Page 818]]

successfully under the terms and conditions of a proposed procurement. 
Consideration shall be given to such matters as contractor integrity, 
compliance with public policy, record of past performance, and financial 
and technical resources.
    (g) Procurement methods. State agency procurements made in whole or 
in part with program funds shall be by one of the following methods:
    (1) Small purchase procedures are those relatively simple and 
informal procurement methods that are sound and appropriate for a 
procurement of services, supplies, or other property, costing in the 
aggregate not more than $10,000. State agencies shall comply with State 
or local small purchase dollar limits under $10,000. If small purchase 
procedures are used for a procurement under the program, price or rate 
quotations shall be obtained from an adequate number of qualified 
sources.
    (2) In competitive sealed bids (formal advertising), sealed bids are 
publicly solicited and a firm-fixed-price contract (lump sum or unit 
price) is awarded to the responsible bidder whose bid, conforming with 
all the material terms and conditions of the invitation for bids, is 
lowest in price.
    (i) In order for the State agency to use this method of procurement 
the following conditions, as a minimum, must prevail:
    (A) A complete, adequate, and realistic specification or purchase 
description is available.
    (B) Two or more responsible suppliers are willing and able to 
compete effectively for the State agency's business.
    (C) The procurement lends itself to a firm-fixed-price contract, and 
selection of the successful bidder can appropriately be made principally 
on the basis of price.
    (ii) If formal advertising is used for a procurement under a grant, 
the following requirements shall apply:
    (A) A sufficient time prior to the date set for opening of bids, 
bids shall be solicited from an adequate number of known suppliers. In 
addition, the invitation shall be publicly advertised.
    (B) The invitation for bids, including specifications and pertinent 
attachments, shall clearly define the items or services needed in order 
for the bidders to properly respond to the invitation.
    (C) All bids shall be opened publicly at the time and place stated 
in the invitation for bids.
    (D) A firm-fixed-price contract award shall be made by written 
notice by the State agency to that responsible bidder whose bid, 
conforming to the invitation for bids, is lowest. Where specified in the 
bidding documents, factors such as discounts, transportation costs and 
life cycle costs shall be considered in determining which bid is lowest. 
Payment discounts may only be used to determine low bid when prior 
experience of the State agency indicates that such discounts are 
generally taken.
    (E) Any or all bids may be rejected by the State agency when there 
are sound documented business reasons in the best interest of the 
program.
    (3) In competitive negotiation, proposals are requested from a 
number of sources and the Request for Proposal is publicized, 
negotiations are normally conducted with more than one of the sources 
submitting offers, and either a fixed-price or cost-reimbursable type 
contract is awarded, as appropriate. Competitive negotiation may be used 
if conditions are appropriate for the use of formal advertising. If 
competitive negotiation is used for procurement under a grant, the 
following requirements shall apply:
    (i) Proposals shall be solicited from an adequate number of 
qualified sources to permit reasonable competition consistent with the 
nature and requirements of the procurement. The Request for Proposals 
shall be publicized and reasonable requests by other sources to compete 
shall be honored to the maximum extent practicable.
    (ii) The Request for Proposal shall identify all significant 
evaluation factors, including price or cost where required and their 
relative importance.
    (iii) The State agency shall provide procedures for technical 
evaluation of the proposals received, determinations of responsible 
offerors for the purpose of written or oral discussions, and selection 
for contract award.
    (iv) Award may be made to the responsible offeror whose proposal 
will be

[[Page 819]]

most advantageous to the State agency, price and other factors 
considered. Unsuccessful offerors should be notified promptly.
    (v) State agencies may utilize competitive negotiation procedures 
for procurement of architectural/engineering professional services 
whereby competitors' qualifications are evaluated and the most qualified 
competitor is selected subject to negotiation of fair and reasonable 
compensation.
    (4) Noncompetitive negotiation is procurement through solicitation 
of a proposal from only one source, or after solicitation of a number of 
sources, competition is determined inadequate. Noncompetitive 
negotiation may be used when the award of a contract is infeasible under 
small purchase, competitive bidding (formal advertising) or competitive 
negotiation procedures. Awards of contracts by noncompetitive 
negotiation are limited to the following:
    (i) The item is available only from a single source;
    (ii) Public exigency or emergency when the urgency for the 
requirement will not permit a delay incident to competitive procurement;
    (iii) FCS authorizes noncompetitive procurement; or
    (iv) After solicitation of a number of sources, competition is 
determined inadequate.
    (h) Contract pricing. The cost plus a percentage of cost and 
percentage of construction cost method(s) of contracting may not be used 
by a State agency. State agencies shall perform some form of cost or 
price analysis in connection with every procurement action including 
contract modifications. Costs or prices based on estimated costs for 
contracts, paid in whole or in part by FCS program funds, shall be 
allowed only to the extent that costs incurred or cost estimates 
included in negotiated prices are consistent with Federal cost 
principles.
    (i) State agency procurement records. State agencies shall maintain 
records sufficient to detail the significant history of a procurement. 
These records shall include, but are not necessarily limited to, 
information pertinent to the rationale for the method of procurement, 
the selection of contract type, the contract selection or rejection, and 
the basis for the cost or price.
    (j) Contract provisions. In addition to provisions defining a sound 
and complete procurement contract, State agencies shall include the 
following contract provisions or conditions in all procurement contracts 
and subcontracts as required by this provision, Federal law, or FCS:
    (1) Contracts other than small purchases shall contain provisions or 
conditions which will allow for administrative, contractual, or legal 
remedies in instances where contractors violate or breach contract 
terms, and provide for such sanctions and penalties as may be 
appropriate.
    (2) All contracts in excess of $10,000 shall contain suitable 
provisions for termination by the State agency including the manner by 
which it will be effected and the basis for settlement. In addition, 
such contracts shall describe conditions under which the contract may be 
terminated for default as well as conditions where the contract may be 
terminated because of circumstances beyond the control of the 
contractor.
    (3) All contracts awarded in excess of $10,000 by State agencies and 
their contractors or subagencies shall contain a provision requiring 
compliance with Executive Order 11246, entitled ``Equal Employment 
Opportunity,'' as amended by Executive Order 11375, and as supplemented 
in Department of Labor regulations (29 CFR part 60).
    (4) All contracts and subcontracts for construction or repair shall 
include a provision for compliance with the Copeland ``Anti-Kickback'' 
Act (18 U.S.C. 874) as supplemented in Department of Labor regulations 
(29 CFR part 3). This Act provides that each contractor or subagency 
shall be prohibited from inducing, by any means, any person employed in 
the construction, completion, or repair of public work, to give up any 
part of the compensation to which he is otherwise entitled. The State 
agency shall report all suspected or reported violations to FCS.
    (5) Where applicable, all contracts awarded by State agencies and 
subagencies in excess of $2,000 for construction contracts in excess of 
$2,500 for other contracts which involve the

[[Page 820]]

employment of mechanics or laborers shall include a provision for 
compliance with sections 103 and 107 of the Contract Work Hours and 
Safety Standards Act (40 U.S.C. 327 through 330) as supplemented by 
Department of Labor regulations (29 CFR part 5). Under section 103 of 
the Act, each contractor shall be required to compute the wages of every 
mechanic and laborer on the basis of a standard work day of 8 hours and 
a standard work week of 40 hours. Work in excess of the standard work 
day or work week is permissible provided that the work is compensated at 
a rate of not less than 1\1/2\ times the basic rate for all hours worked 
in excess of 8 hours in any calendar day or 40 hours in the work week. 
Section 107 of the Act is applicable to construction work and provides 
that no laborer or mechanic shall be required to work in surroundings or 
under working conditions which are unsanitary, hazardous, or dangerous 
to his health and safety as determined under construction, safety, and 
health standards promulated by the Secretary of Labor. These 
requirements do not apply to the purchases of supplies or materials or 
articles ordinarily available on the open market, or contracts for 
transportation or transmission of intelligence.
    (6) The contract shall include notice of FCS requirements and 
regulations pertaining to reporting and print rights under any contract 
involving research, developmental, experimental, or demonstration work 
with respect to any discovery or invention which arises or is developed 
in the course of or under such contract, and of FCS requirements and 
regulations pertaining to copyrights and rights to data so derived.
    (7) All negotiated contracts (except those awarded by small 
purchases procedures) awarded by State agencies shall include a 
provision to the effect that the State agency, FCS, the Comptroller 
General of the United States, or any of their duly authorized 
representatives, shall have access to any books, documents, papers, and 
records of the contractor which are directly pertinent to that specific 
contract, for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts, and 
transcriptions. State agencies shall require contracts to maintain all 
required records for three years after the State agency makes final 
payments or all other pending matters are closed, whichever is last.
    (8) Contracts, subcontracts, and subgrants of amounts in excess of 
$100,000 shall contain a provision which requires compliance with all 
applicable standards, orders, or requirements issued under section 306 
of the Clean Air Act, section 508 of the Clean Water Act, Executive 
Order 11738, and Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regulations, 
which prohibit the use under nonexempt Federal contract, grants, or 
loans of facilities included on the EPA List of Violating Facilities. 
The provision shall require reporting of violations to the FCS and to 
the USEPA Assistant Administrator for Enforcement.
    (9) Contracts shall recognize mandatory standards and policies 
relating to energy efficiency which are contained in the State energy 
conservation plan issued in compliance with the Energy Policy and 
Conservation Act (Pub. L. 94-165).
    (k) Contract administration. State agencies shall maintain a 
contract administration system insuring that contractors perform in 
accordance with the terms, conditions, and specifications of their 
contracts or purchase orders.


<R05>
Sec. 277.15  Food stamp investigations and prosecutions.

    (a) General. This section establishes the standards and procedures 
for Federal funding of State and local costs of intentional Program 
violation investigations, prosecutions and administrative 
disqualification hearings under the Food Stamp Program.
    (b) Funding. Upon submission to and approval by FCS of a budget 
revision and the information required by paragraph (c) of this section, 
State agencies will be funded at 75 percent of all allowable direct and 
indirect costs in accordance with the requirement contained in this 
section. This higher rate may apply retroactively only to costs incurred 
in the Federal fiscal year during which a State agency applies for 75 
percent funding, regardless of when the determination of eligibility for 
75 percent funding is made. In cases where 75

[[Page 821]]

percent funding of the operation of an agency other than the State 
welfare agency is or will be involved, an information statement shall be 
submitted by each State agency to include a description of such 
operations.
    (c) State agency descriptions. Concurrent with the budget revision 
required in paragraph (d) of this section, the State agency shall submit 
the following information:
    (1) Identification of the oganizational units, with a brief 
description of the intentional Program violation disqualification 
hearing, investigation or prosecution function assigned, that is claimed 
at the 75 percent rate;
    (2) A copy of the statutes or court decisions under which 
intentional Food Stamp Program violation cases are prosecuted;
    (3) A detailed description of the coordination between the 
investigative units and the prosecuting units, and the process by which 
prosecuting officials present indictments regarding intentional Food 
Stamp Program violation cases;
    (4) Agreement that investigative reports, prepared by the 
investigation or prosecution units, and other related records will be 
made available to USDA upon request; and
    (5) Assurance that the administrative disqualification hearing 
activity claimed under this part is conducted in accordance with 
Sec. 273.16.
    (d) Budget revision. The State agency shall prepare and submit a 
budget revision in compliance with Secs. 272.2 and 277.3 to FCS for 
approval.
    (e) Eligible activity. The following activities performed at the 
State or local level shall be eligible for funding at 75 percent of the 
costs if they are an integral element of intentional Food Stamp Program 
investigations, prosecutions, and administrative disqualification 
hearings.
    (1) Direct charges. Direct charges are costs which may be directly 
attributable to employees assigned specifically to the investigation and 
prosecution functions for intentional Food Stamp Program violations. 
Such employees need not be assigned full time, but in the event they are 
employed less than full time, time sheets or time records must be used 
to document the amount of time spent on these functions.
    (i) For investigative function, only employees whose State or local 
job title is ``Investigator'' or a similar descriptive title shall be 
eligible for the increased funding. Exceptions shall be granted based on 
adequate justification that the majority of the job duties are 
specifically related to the investigative function.
    (ii) Costs related to the investigative or prosecutive function 
which are performed by agencies other than the State agency shall be 
based on a formal agreement between the State or local agency and 
provider agency. These interagency agreements shall meet the 
requirements of this part in regard to allowable charges. Funding under 
these interagency agreements shall be provided by the State agency from 
their funds and funds made available by FCS.
    (iii) Costs relating to the establishment and collection of claims, 
when performed by investigators or prosecutors or by any separate unit 
having claims establishment or collection as its primary function, shall 
be eligible for the increased funding.
    (iv) Costs related to reporting individuals disqualified for 
intentional Program violation and to retrieving data from the 
Disqualification Reporting Network file, when performed by employees 
assigned specifically to the food stamp intentional Program violation 
investigation and prosecution functions.
    (2) Indirect charges. Indirect charges are, in general, those costs 
which are attributable through allocation to the investigation and 
prosecution functions for intentional Food Stamp Program violations.
    (3) Documentation. The requirements of appendix A, part 277, 
sections (2)(E) and (2)(F), will be followed for the classification and 
documentation of costs by the State or local agency.
    (f) Ineligible activity. The following activities, whether performed 
at the State or local level, shall be allowable only at the 50 percent 
funding level, and shall be ineligible for funding at the 75 percent 
level.
    (1) Administrative reviews, such as fair hearings as required per 7 
CFR

[[Page 822]]

part 273 or Performance Reporting System reviews required per 7 CFR part 
275.
    (2) Investigations of authorized retail or wholesale food concerns 
except when performed in coordination with USDA Office of Inspector 
General and FCS.
    (3) Investigations or establishing claims against households by 
workers whose regular duties include the determination of a household's 
eligibility for participation in the Food Stamp Program, except as may 
be granted under the provisions of paragraph (e)(1)(i) of this section.
    (4) Verification of eligibility information provided by the 
household for the purpose of making an eligibility determination, and
    (5) Audits.

[Amdt. 188, 45 FR 85802, Dec. 30, 1980, as amended by Amdt. 210, 47 FR 
41096, Sept. 17, 1982; Amdt. 242, 48 FR 6865, Feb. 15, 1983]


<R05>
Sec. 277.16  Suspension, disallowance and program closeout.

    (a) Suspension. When a State agency has materially failed to comply 
with any of the provisions contained in the Act, regulations, or FCS-
approved State Plan of Operation, FCS may, after written notification to 
the State agency, temporarily withhold some or all Federal 
reimbursements for costs of administration of the Food Stamp Program in 
accordance with Sec. 276.4. Adjustments will be made either by adjusting 
the Letter of Credit authorization or by not allowing the State agency 
to withdraw funds.
    (b) Disallowance. (1) FCS may disallow costs in accordance with part 
276 and effect nonpayment for some or all costs incurred by a State 
agency which are normally allowable but are determined by FCS to be 
nonreimbursable because the State agency has failed to comply with any 
of the provisions contained in the Act, regulations, or FCS-approved 
State Plan of Operation.
    (2) FCS may also disallow costs and institute recovery of Federal 
funds when a State agency fails to adhere to the cost principles of this 
part and appendix A.
    (c) Offsets to the Letter of Credit. (1) FCS may recover funds when 
owed by the State agency to FCS through offsets to the Letter of Credit. 
Offsets shall include:
    (i) Costs determined by FCS to be disallowed under the provisions of 
this part;
    (ii) Unallowable costs resulting from audit or investigation 
findings;
    (iii) Amounts owed which have been billed to the State agency and 
which the State agency has failed to pay without cause acceptable to 
FCS; or
    (iv) Amounts owed to FCS for title IV reimbursements and recipient 
claims collections which were reported on the FCS-209 and which the 
State agency has failed to pay.
    (2) The amounts recovered through the offset procedure should be in 
one lump sum. If recovery of funds through the offset procedure is not 
possible in one lump sum, FCS shall make appropriate adjustments to 
recover the funds in not more than three fiscal years.
    (d) Program transfer or termination. (1) When termination or 
transfer of a State program has been agreed upon by FCS, the following 
closeout procedure shall be observed:
    (i) Upon request, FCS shall make or arrange for prompt payment to 
the State agency for allowable costs not covered by previous payments.
    (ii) The State agency shall immediately refund to FCS any 
unobligated balance of cash withdrawn by the State agency for the 
administration of the program in the affected State or Indian 
reservation.
    (iii) The State agency shall submit to FCS within 90 days after the 
date of termination of the program, all required financial, performance, 
and other reports. FCS may grant extensions when requested by the State 
agency.
    (iv) FCS shall adjust the amount authorized by the Letter of Credit 
in order to effect payment of any amounts due the State agency, and if 
appropriate, shall bill the State agency for any amounts due to FCS. The 
amounts of such billings shall be promptly remitted to FCS.
    (v) In the event a final audit has not been performed prior to the 
closeout of the program, FCS shall retain the right to disallow costs or 
recover funds resulting from the final audit findings.

[[Page 823]]

    (2) Provisions of Sec. 277.13 apply for any property acquired with 
program funds or received from the Federal Government in connection with 
the program and which was in use in the affected project area or areas.

[Amdt. 188, 45 FR 85702, Dec. 30, 1980, as amended by Amdt. 342, 59 FR 
2733, Jan. 19, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 277.17  Audit requirements.

    (a) General. This section sets forth the audit requirements for 
State agencies that receive FCS program funds. Audits shall be conducted 
on an organization-wide basis. Such audits are to determine whether:
    (1) Financial operations are conducted properly;
    (2) The financial statements are presented fairly;
    (3) The organization has complied with laws and regulations 
affecting the expenditure of Federal funds;
    (4) Internal procedures have been established to meet the objectives 
of federally assisted programs; and
    (5) Financial reports to the Federal Government contain accurate and 
reliable information.

Except where required by law, no additional requirements for audit will 
be imposed by FCS unless approved by the Office of Management and Budget 
(OMB). The provisions of this section do not limit the authority of FCS 
to make audits of State agencies, their subdivisions, and subcontracts. 
However, if independent audits arranged for by State agencies meet the 
requirements prescribed herein, FCS shall rely on them, and any 
additional audit work already done.
    (b) Audit standards. (1) State agencies shall use their own 
procedures to arrange for independent audits, and to prescribe the scope 
of audits, provided that the audits comply with the requirements set 
forth in this section. Where contracts are awarded for audit services, 
the contracts shall include a reference to OMB Circular A-102, 
Attachment P.
    (2) Audits shall be made in accordance with the General Accounting 
Office ``Standards for Audit of Governmental Organizations, Programs, 
Activities, and Functions, the Guidelines for Financial and Compliance 
Audits of Federally Assisted Program,'' and any compliance supplements 
approved by OMB, and generally accepted auditing standards established 
by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants.
    (c) Purpose of audit. Audits will include, at a minimum, an 
examination of the systems of internal control, systems established to 
ensure compliance with laws and regulations affecting the expenditure of 
Federal funds, financial transactions and accounts, and financial 
statements and reports of State agencies. These examinations are to 
determine whether:
    (1) There is effective control over and proper accounting for 
revenues expenditures, assets, and liabilities.
    (2) The financial statements are presented fairly in accordance with 
generally accepted accounting principles.
    (3) The Federal financial reports (including Financial Status 
Reports, Cash Reports, and claims for advances and reimbursements) 
contain accurate and reliable financial data; and are presented in 
accordance with the terms of applicable agreements, and in accordance 
with Attachment H of OMB Circular A-102.
    (4) Federal funds are being expended in accordance with the terms of 
applicable agreements and those provisions of Federal law or regulations 
that could have a material effect on the financial statements or on the 
awards tested.
    (d) Audit coverage. A representative number of charges to Federal 
funds shall be tested. The test shall be representative of:
    (1) The universe of Federal funds received, and
    (2) All cost categories that materially affect the award. The test 
is to determine whether the charges:
    (i) Are necessary and reasonable for the proper administration of 
the program;
    (ii) Conform to any limitations or exclusions in the award;
    (iii) Were given consistent accounting treatments and applied 
uniformly to both federally assisted and other activities of the State 
agency;
    (iv) Were net of applicable credits;

[[Page 824]]

    (v) Did not include costs property chargeable to other federally 
assisted programs;
    (vi) Were properly recorded (i.e., correct amount, date) and 
supported by source documentation;
    (vii) Were approved in advance, if subject to prior approval in 
accordance with Financial Management Circular 74-4;
    (viii) Were incurred in accordance with competitive purchasing 
procedures, if covered by OMB Circular A-102, Attachment O; and
    (ix) Were allocated equitably to benefiting activities, including 
non-Federal activities.
    (3) Audits usually will be made annually, but not less frequently 
than every two years.
    (4) If the auditors become aware of irregularities in the State 
agency, subagency or subcontractor, the auditor shall promptly notify 
the cognizant agency and State agency management officials above the 
level of involvement. Irregularities include such matters as conflict of 
interest, falsification of records or reports, and misappropriation of 
funds and other assets.
    (e) Audit report. The audit report shall include:
    (1) Financial statements, including footnotes, of the State agency, 
subagency, or subcontractor organization.
    (2) The auditor's comments on the financial statements which should:
    (i) Identify the statements examined and the period covered.
    (ii) Identify the various programs under which the organization 
received Federal funds, and the amounts received for each program.
    (iii) State that the audit was done in accordance with paragraph (d) 
of this section.
    (iv) Express an opinion as to whether the financial statements are 
fairly presented in accordance with generally accepted accounting 
principles. If an unqualified opinion cannot be expressed, state the 
nature of the qualification.
    (3) The auditor's comments on compliance and internal control which 
should:
    (i) Include comments on weaknesses in and noncompliance with the 
systems of internal control, separately identifying material weaknesses.
    (ii) Identify the nature and impact of any noted instances of 
noncompliance with the terms of agreements and those provisions of 
Federal law or regulation that could have a material effect on the 
financial statements and reports.
    (iii) Contain an expression of positive assurance with respect to 
compliance with requirements for tested items, and negative assurance 
for untested items.
    (4) Comments on the accuracy and completeness of financial reports 
and claims for advances or reimbursements to Federal agencies.
    (5) Comments on corrective action taken or planned by the State 
agency.
    (f) Record retention. Work paper and reports shall be retained for a 
minimum of three years from the date of the audit report unless the 
auditor is notified in writing by the cognizant agency of the need to 
extend the retention period. The audit workpapers shall be made 
available upon request to the cognizant agency or its designees and the 
General Accounting Office or its designees.
    (g) Cognizant agency responsibilities. The cognizant agency shall 
have the following responsibilities:
    (1) Obtain or make quality assessment reviews of the work of non-
Federal audit organizations, and provide the results to other interested 
audit agencies. If a non-Federal audit organization is responsible for 
audits of State agencies that have different cognizant audit agencies, a 
single quality assessment review will be arranged.
    (2) Assure that all audit reports of State agencies that affect 
federally assisted programs are received, reviewed, and distributed to 
appropriate Federal audit officials. These officials will be responsible 
for distributing audit reports to their program officials.
    (3) Whenever significant inadequacies in an audit are disclosed, the 
State agency will be advised and the auditor will be called upon to take 
corrective action. If corrective action is not taken, the cognizant 
agency shall notify the State agency and Federal awarding agencies of 
the facts and its recommendation. Major inadequacies or repetitive 
substandard performance

[[Page 825]]

of independent auditors shall be referred to appropriate professional 
bodies.
    (4) Assure that satisfactory audit coverage is provided in a timely 
manner and in accordance with the provisions of this section.
    (5) Provide technical advice and act as a liaison between Federal 
agencies, independent auditors and State agencies.
    (6) Maintain a followup system on audit findings and investigative 
matters to assure that audit findings are resolved.
    (7) Inform other affected audit agencies of irregularities 
uncovered. The audit agencies, in turn, shall inform all appropriate 
officials in their agencies. State or local government law enforcement 
and prosecuting authorities shall also be informed of irregularities 
within their jurisdiction.
    (8) Recipients shall require subrecipients that are local 
governments of Indian tribal governments to adopt the requirements in 
paragraphs (d) through (f) of this section. The recipient shall ensure 
that the subrecipient audit reports are received as required, and shall 
submit the reports to the cognizant agency. The cognizant agency will 
have the responsibility for those reports described in paragraph (g) of 
this section.


<R05>
Sec. 277.18  Establishment of an Automated Data Processing (ADP) and Information Retrieval System.

    (a) Scope and application. This section establishes conditions for 
initial and continuing authority to claim Federal financial 
participation (FFP) for the costs of the planning, development, 
acquisition, installation and implementation of ADP equipment and 
services used in the administration of the Food Stamp Program. Due to 
the nature of the procurement of ADP equipment and services, current 
State agency approved cost allocation plans for ongoing operational 
costs shall not apply to ADP system development costs under this section 
unless documentation required under paragraph (c) of this section is 
submitted to and approvals are obtained from FCS.
    (b) Definitions:
    Acceptance Documents means written evidence of satisfactory 
completion of an approved phase of work or contract, and acceptance 
thereof by the State agency.
    Advance Planning Document for Project Implementation or 
Implementation APD means a written plan of action requesting Federal 
financial participation (FFP) to acquire and implement ADP services and/
or equipment.
    Advance Planning Document for Project Planning or Planning APD means 
a brief written plan of action that requests FFP to accomplish the 
planning necessary for a State agency to determine the need for and plan 
the acquisition of ADP equipment and/or services, and to acquire 
information necessary to prepare an Implementation APD.
    Advance Planning Document Update (APDU) means an annual self-
certification by the State agency on the status of project development 
activities and expenditures in relation to the approved Planning APD or 
Implementation APD. An APDU may also be submitted as needed to request 
funding approval for project continuation whenever significant project 
changes occur or are anticipated.
    Automated Data Processing or ADP means data processing performed by 
a system of electronic or electrical machines so interconnected and 
interacting as to minimize the need for human assistance or 
intervention.
    Automated Data Processing Equipment or hardware means:
    (1) Electronic digital computers, regardless of size, capacity, or 
price, that accept data input, store data, perform calculations, and 
other processing steps, and prepare information;
    (2) All peripheral or auxiliary equipment used in support of 
electronic digital computers whether selected and acquired with the 
computer or separately;
    (3) Data transmission or communications equipment that is selected 
and acquired solely or primarily for use with a configuration of ADP 
equipment which includes an electronic digital computer; and
    (4) Data input equipment used to enter directly or indirectly into 
an electronic digital computer, peripheral

[[Page 826]]

or auxiliary equipment, or data transmission, or communication 
equipment.
    Automated Data Processing Services means:
    (1) Services to operate ADP equipment, either by private sources, or 
by employees of the State agency, or by State or local organizations 
other than the State agency; and/or
    (2) Services provided by private sources or by employees of the 
State agency or by State and local organizations other than the State 
agency to perform such tasks as feasibility studies, system studies, 
system design efforts, development of system specifications, system 
analysis, programming and system implementation. This includes system 
training, systems development, site preparation, data entry, and 
personal services related to automated systems development and 
operations that are specifically identified as part of a Planning APD or 
Implementation APD.
    Data Processing means the preparation of source media containing 
data or basic elements of information and the use of such source media 
according to precise rules of procedures to accomplish such operations 
as classifying, sorting, calculating, summarizing, recording, and 
transmitting.
    Emergency situation means a situation where:
    (1) The State agency can demonstrate to FCS an immediate need to 
acquire ADP equipment or services in order to continue operation of the 
Food Stamp Program; and
    (2) The State agency can clearly document that the need could not 
have been anticipated or planned for and the need prevents the State 
from following the prior approval requirements of Sec. 277.18(c).
    Enhanced funding or enhanced FFP rate means Federal reimbursement at 
the 63 percent level for allowable costs for State agency planning, 
design, development and installation of computerized systems, as 
authorized by Sec. 277.4(b)(11) and (b)(12), and in accordance with the 
requirements at Sec. 277.18(g).
    Feasibility Study means a preliminary study to determine whether it 
is sufficiently probable that effective and efficient use of ADP 
equipment or systems would warrant a substantial investment of staff, 
time, and money being requested, and whether the plan can be 
accomplished successfully.
    Functional Requirements Specification means an initial definition of 
the proposed system, which documents the goals, objectives, user or 
programmatic requirements, the operating environment, and the proposed 
design methodology, e.g., centralized or distributed. This document 
details what the new system and/or hardware should do, not how it is to 
do it. The Specification document shall be based upon a clear and 
accurate description of the functional requirements for the project, and 
shall not, in competitive procurements, lead to requirements which 
unduly restrict competition.
    General Systems Design means a combination of narrative and diagrams 
describing the generic architecture of a system as opposed to the 
detailed architecture of the system. A general systems design may 
include a systems diagram; narrative identifying overall logic flow and 
systems functions; a description of equipment needed (including 
processing, data transmission and storage requirements); a description 
of other resource requirements which will be necessary to operate the 
system; a description of system performance requirements; and a 
description of the environment in which the system will operate, 
including how the system will function within that environment.
    Regular funding or regular FFP rate means any Federal reimbursement 
rate authorized by Sec. 277.4(b), except the 63 percent funding rate for 
State agency planning, design, development and installation of 
computerized systems, as specified at Sec. 277.4(b)(11) and (b)(12).
    Request for Proposal or RFP means the document used for public 
solicitations of competitive proposals from qualified sources as 
outlined in Sec. 277.14(g)(3).
    Service Agreement means the document, described in Sec. 277.18(f), 
signed by the State or local agency and the State or local central data 
processing facility whenever a central data processing facility provides 
ADP services to the State or local agency.
    Software means a set of computer programs, procedures, and 
associated

[[Page 827]]

documentation used to operate the hardware.
    System specifications means information about the new ADP systems, 
such as: Workload descriptions, input data, information to be maintained 
and processed, data processing techniques, and output data, which is 
required to determine the ADP equipment and software necessary to 
implement the system design.
    System study means the examination of existing information flow and 
operational procedures within an organization. The study consists of 
three basic phases: Data gathering or investigation of the present 
system and new information requirements; analysis of the data gathered 
in the investigation; and synthesis, or refitting, of the parts and 
relationships uncovered through the analysis into an efficient system.
    (c) General acquisition requirements--(1) Requirement for prior FCS 
approval. A State agency shall obtain prior written approval from FCS as 
specified in paragraph (c)(2) of this section when it plans to acquire 
ADP equipment or services with proposed FFP that it anticipates will 
have total acquisition costs of $5 million or more in Federal and State 
funds. This applies to both competitively bid and sole source 
acquisitions. A State agency shall also obtain prior written approval 
from FCS of its justification for a sole source acquisition when it 
plans to acquire ADP equipment or services non-competitively from a 
nongovernmental source which has a total State and Federal acquisition 
cost of more than $1 million but no more than $5 million. The State 
agency shall request prior FCS approval by submitting the Planning APD, 
the Implementation APD or the justification for the sole source 
acquisition signed by the appropriate State official to the FCS Regional 
Office. However, a State agency shall obtain prior written approval from 
FCS for the acquisition of ADP equipment or services to be utilized in 
an EBT system regardless of the cost of the acquisition.
    (2) Specific prior approval requirements. (i) For ADP equipment and 
services acquisitions which require prior approval as specified in 
paragraph (c)(1) of this section, the State agency shall obtain the 
prior written approval of FCS for:
    (A) The Planning APD prior to entering into contractual agreements 
or making any other commitment for acquiring the necessary planning 
services;
    (B) The Implementation APD prior to entering into contractual 
agreements or making any other commitment for the acquisition of ADP 
equipment or services.
    (ii) For ADP equipment and services acquisitions requiring prior 
approval as specified in paragraph (c)(1) of this section, prior 
approval of the following documents associated with such acquisitions is 
also required:
    (A) RFP's; unless specifically exempted by FCS, the State agency 
shall obtain prior written approval of the RFP before the RFP may be 
released. However, RFPs costing up to $5 million for competitive 
procurements and up to $1 million for noncompetitive acquisitions from 
non-governmental sources and which are an integral part of the approved 
APD need not be submitted to FCS. States will be required to submit RFPs 
under this threshold amount on an exception basis or if the procurement 
strategy is not adequately described and justified in an APD. The State 
agency shall obtain prior written approval from FCS for Request for 
Proposals which are associated with an EBT system regardless of the 
cost.
    (B) Contracts; unless specifically exempted by FCS, the State agency 
shall obtain prior written approval before the contract may be signed by 
the State agency. However, contracts costing up to $5 million for 
competitive procurements and up to $1 million for noncompetitive 
acquisitions from nongovernmental sources, and which are an integral 
part of the approved APD need not be submitted to FCS. States will be 
required to submit contracts under this threshold amount on an exception 
basis or if the procurement strategy is not adequately described and 
justified in an APD. The State agency shall obtain prior written 
approval from FCS for contracts which are associated with an EBT system 
regardless of the cost.
    (C) Contract amendments; unless specifically exempted by FCS, the 
State

[[Page 828]]

agency shall obtain prior written approval before the contract amendment 
may be signed by the State agency. However, contract amendments 
involving cost increases of up to $1 million or time extensions of up to 
120 days, and which are an integral part of the approved APD need not be 
submitted to FCS. States will be required to submit contract amendments 
under these threshold amounts on an exception basis or if the contract 
amendment is not adequately described and justified in an APD. 
Amendments to contracts for EBT systems shall be permitted within the 
approved funding cap. State agencies shall submit copies of any contract 
amendments or contract extensions to FCS with an accompanying analysis 
of the impact the changes would have upon the approved issuance cap.
    (iii) The State agency must obtain prior written approval from FCS 
as specified in paragraphs (c)(2) (i) and (ii) of this section in order 
to claim and receive reimbursement for the associated costs of the ADP 
acquisition.
    (3) Approval requirements. (i) For ADP equipment and service 
acquisitions requiring prior approval as specified in paragraph (c)(1) 
of this section, the State agency shall submit the following documents 
to FCS for approval:
    (A) Feasibility studies, when specifically required by FCS as a 
condition of approving the Planning APD. When required by FCS for 
approval, the State agency shall submit the feasibility study no later 
than 90 days after its completion.
    (B) APD Updates, as required by paragraph (e) of this section, on an 
annual or as needed basis.
    (ii) The State agency must obtain FCS approval of the documents 
specified in paragraph (c)(3)(i) of this section in order to claim and 
receive reimbursement for the associated costs of the ADP acquisition.
    (4) Approval by the State agency. Approval by the State agency is 
required for all documents specified in this regulation prior to 
submission for FCS approval. In addition, State agency approval is also 
required for those acquisitions of ADP equipment and services not 
requiring prior approval by FCS.
    (5) Prompt action on requests for prior approval. FCS will reply 
promptly to State requests for prior approval. If FCS has not provided 
written approval, disapproval or a request for additional information 
within 60 days of FCS' letter acknowledging receipt of the State's 
request, the request will be deemed to have provisionally met the prior 
approval requirement in paragraph (c) of this section. However, 
provisional approval will not exempt a State from having to meet all 
other Federal requirements which pertain to the acquisition of ADP 
equipment and services. Such requirements remain subject to Federal 
audit and review.
    (d) APD content requirements--(1) Planning APD. The State agency may 
request FFP at the regular or enhanced funding rate for the costs of 
determining the need for and planning the acquisition of ADP equipment 
or services through the submission of the Planning APD. The State agency 
may request FFP for the costs of planning activities beginning with 
initial project inception through the performance of necessary systems 
and alternatives analyses, selection and design, including the 
completion of a general systems design. The Planning APD shall contain 
the following information:
    (i) The State agency's description of the programmatic and 
organizational needs and/or problems to be addressed by the proposed ADP 
acquisition and the specific objectives to be accomplished under the 
Planning APD;
    (ii) The State agency's commitment to complete the following, where 
appropriate, as part of project planning activities: a functional 
requirements specification document, feasibility study, alternatives 
analysis, cost-benefit analysis, and a general system design. If an 
existing ADP system is to be transferred, the State agency may plan to 
use the general system design of the transferred system. State agencies 
requesting FFP at 63 percent funding rate shall include a statement of 
commitment that the proposed ADP acquisition would meet the functional 
requirements of Sec. 272.10;
    (iii) The State agency's description of the organization, required 
State and contractual resources and availability of those resources, and 
the assignments

[[Page 829]]

of roles and responsibilities for project planning activities. The State 
agency shall include a description of resources to be procured and 
procurement methods;
    (iv) The State agency's schedule of activities and deliverables 
during project planning, including a description and schedule of 
procurement activities to be undertaken in support of the planning 
project; and
    (v) A proposed budget which shall identify costs for project 
planning activities by Federal fiscal year. The budget shall include an 
estimate of prospective cost distribution to participating Federal 
agencies and the method for cost allocation. The State agency shall also 
include an estimate of the total project costs, including both the cost 
of the planning project and the cost of any eventual ADP equipment and/
or services acquisition, which will be used only for determining whether 
the thresholds of Sec. 277.18(c)(1) are met. An estimate of total 
project cost for an EBT system shall not be required to be incorporated 
into the Planning APD budget.
    (2) Implementation APD. The State agency may request FFP at the 
regular or enhanced funding rate to acquire ADP equipment and services 
through the submission of the Implementation APD. The State agency may 
request FFP for the necessary activities to develop, acquire, install 
and implement the proposed ADP system or acquisition. The Implementation 
APD shall contain the following information, where appropriate:
    (i) The State agency shall complete and submit a functional 
requirements specification document;
    (ii) The State agency shall submit a feasibility study and 
associated alternatives analyses, which include the transfer or 
modification of an existing system from a similar State or jurisdiction 
in the examination of alternatives. State agencies which reject the 
transfer or modification of an existing system must provide an analysis 
describing the barriers to system transfer as part of the feasibility 
study. The analysis of barriers to system transfer shall include a 
comparison of the costs of overcoming the problem in transferring an 
operational system to the costs of developing a new system;
    (iii) The State agency shall submit the new or transferred general 
systems design and shall also document the intended approaches, plans 
and techniques to develop or modify specific aspects of the proposed ADP 
system or acquisition including hardware, software, telecommunications, 
system testing, and data security;
    (iv) The State agency shall describe the anticipated resource 
requirements for implementation of the ADP project, the resources 
planned to be available for the project, and plans for augmenting 
resources to meet resource requirements;
    (v) The State agency shall indicate the principal events and 
schedule of activities, milestones, and deliverables during 
implementation of the project;
    (vi) The State agency shall submit a proposed budget which 
identifies costs for intended project development and implementation 
activities by Federal fiscal year and shall include a consideration of 
all possible Implementation APD activity costs (e.g., system conversion, 
computer capacity planning, supplies, training, and miscellaneous ADP 
expenses). The budget shall contain an estimate of prospective cost 
distribution and methods for allocating costs to participating Federal 
agencies;
    (vii) The State agency shall document the scope, methodology, 
evaluation criteria and results of cost-benefit analyses for evaluating 
the selected design and alternatives. The cost-benefit analysis shall 
include a statement indicating the period of time the State agency 
intends to use the proposed equipment or system; and
    (viii) The State agency shall describe the security and interface 
requirements to be employed and the backup and contingency procedures 
available.
    (3) APD Budget. The proposed budget for both the Planning APD and 
the Implementation APD shall include cost distribution plans containing 
the bases for proposed rates, both direct and indirect, for costs 
associated with system planning, development, acquisition or 
implementation, as appropriate. The budget proposals accompanying the 
Implementation APD shall also include proposed cost distribution plans 
and

[[Page 830]]

the bases of proposed rates for the operation of the ADP system. The 
budget activities shall be presented on a Federal fiscal year basis in a 
clear fashion to associate costs with each planned activity. The budgets 
must identify all development costs separately from any ongoing 
operational costs. Costs must be distinguished by developmental projects 
and developmental time periods. Actual costs claimed must be 
reconciliable to projected costs as proposed and approved by FCS in the 
APD.
    (e) APD Update--(1) General submission requirements. The State 
agency shall submit an APD Update for FCS approval for all approved 
Planning and Implementation APD's that are funded at the enhanced FFP 
rate, or that are funded at the regular FFP rate and total acquisition 
costs exceed $5 million. The APD Update shall be submitted to the FCS 
Regional Office within 90 days after the annual anniversary date of the 
original APD approval, unless the submission date is specifically 
altered by FCS.
    (2) Content requirements. The APD Update represents a self-
certification by the State agency of project status in relation to the 
provisions of the approved Planning APD and Implementation APD. The 
Annually Updated APD shall include:
    (i) Project activity status.
    (A) The status of all major tasks and milestones in the approved 
Planning APD, Implementation APD or previous APD Update's for the past 
year. The APD Update shall include all major tasks and milestones 
completed in the past year and degree of completion for unfinished 
tasks.
    (B) The status of all project deliverables completed in the past 
year and degree of completion for unfinished products.
    (C) Reports of past and/or anticipated problems or delays in meeting 
target dates in the approved Planning APD, Implementation APD or 
previous APD Update's for the remainder of the project. The Annually 
Updated APD shall include an explanation of the need to extend any major 
project target dates.
    (ii) Project expenditures.
    (A) A detailed accounting for all expenditures for project 
development over the past year.
    (B) An explanation of differences between projected expenses in the 
approved Planning or Implementation APD, or previous APD Update's, and 
actual expenditures for the past year. If changes in costs are reported, 
FCS may require the submission of a revised cost-benefit analysis as a 
condition for approval of the APD Update.
    (C) Changes to the allocation basis in the approved APD's cost 
allocation methodology.
    (iii) Changes to the approved APD.
    (A) Revised language for all changes to the approved APD or previous 
APD Updates shall be submitted as part of the APD Update, unless 
submitted separately by the State agency as the changes occurred 
throughout the year.
    (B) Changes in project management and/or contractor services.
    (3) Submission as needed. In addition to the requirement for 
approval of an APD Update on an annual basis, as specified in paragraph 
(e)(1) of this section, the State agency may submit an APD Update on a 
more frequent or as needed basis, in order to obtain a commitment of FFP 
whenever significant project changes occur. Without such approval, the 
State agency is at risk for funding of project activities which are not 
in compliance with the terms and conditions of the approved APD and 
subsequently approved APD Updates, until such time as approval is 
specifically granted by FCS. At a minimum, the State agency should 
consider submission of an APD Update whenever any of the following 
changes occur or are anticipated:
    (i) A significant increase ($1 million or more) in total project 
costs;
    (ii) A significant schedule extension (60 days or more) for major 
milestones;
    (iii) A significant change in procurement approach, and/or scope of 
procurement activities beyond that approved in the APD;
    (iv) A change in system concept, or a change to the scope of the 
project; or
    (v) A change to the approved cost allocation methodology.
    (f) Service agreements. The State agency shall execute service 
agreements when data processing services are to be

[[Page 831]]

provided by a State central data processing facility or another State or 
local agency. Service agreements shall be kept on file by the State 
agency and be available for Federal review, and shall:
    (1) Identify the ADP services that will be provided;
    (2) Include, preferably as an amendable attachment, a schedule of 
charges for each identified ADP service, and a certification that these 
charges apply equally to all users;
    (3) Include a description of the method(s) of accounting for the 
services rendered under the agreement and computing services charges;
    (4) Include assurances that services provided will be timely and 
satisfactory;
    (5) Include assurances that information in the computer system as 
well as access, use and disposal of ADP data will be safeguarded in 
accordance with provisions of Sec. 272.1(c) and Sec. 277.13;
    (6) Require the provider to obtain prior approval pursuant to 
Sec. 277.18(c)(1) from FCS for ADP equipment and ADP services that are 
acquired from commercial sources primarily to support the Food Stamp 
Program and requires the provider to comply with Sec. 277.14 for 
procurements related to the service agreement. ADP equipment and 
services are considered to be primarily acquired to support the Food 
Stamp Program when the Program may reasonably be expected to either be 
billed for more than 50 percent of the total charges made to all users 
of the ADP equipment and services during the time period covered by the 
service agreement, or directly charged for the total cost of the 
purchase or lease of ADP equipment or services;
    (7) Include the beginning and ending dates of the period of time 
covered by the service agreement; and
    (8) Include a schedule of expected total charges to the Program for 
the period of the service agreement.
    (g) Entitlement to 63 Percent FFP Rate. (1) A State agency may, at 
its option, request reimbursement one time at a 63 percent FFP rate for 
the costs of planning, design, development and installation of ADP and 
information retrieval systems.
    (2) The 63 percent funding level may be approved by FCS if the 
proposed system will:
    (i) Assist the State agency in meeting the requirements of the Food 
Stamp Act;
    (ii) Meet the program standards specified in Sec. 272.10(b)(1), 
(b)(2) and (b)(3) of this part, except for the requirements in 
paragraphs (b)(2)(vi), (b)(2)(vii), and (b)(3)(xi) of this section to 
eventually transmit data directly to FCS;
    (iii) Be likely to provide more efficient and effective 
administration of the program; and
    (iv) Be compatible with other such systems utilized in the 
administration of State plans under the program of Aid to Families with 
Dependent Children (AFDC).
    (3) State agencies seeking an enhanced level of funding for the 
planning, design, development and installation of automated data 
processing and information retrieval systems shall develop Statewide 
systems which are integrated with AFDC. In cases where a State agency 
can demonstrate that a local, dedicated, or single function (issuance or 
certification only) system will provide for more efficient and effective 
administration of the program, FCS may grant an exception to the 
Statewide integrated requirement. These exceptions will be based on an 
assessment of the proposed system's ability to meet the State agency's 
need for automation. Systems funded as exceptions to this rule, however, 
should be capable, to the extent necessary, of an automated data 
exchange with the State system used to administer AFDC. In no 
circumstances will funding be available for systems which duplicate 
other State agency systems, whether presently operational or planned for 
future development.
    (4) The system developed in response to these regulations shall 
contain the following elements, where appropriate:
    (i) A data base which receives information, sorts, performs 
calculations, and stores information;
    (ii) An information retrieval system which will have the ability to 
access the data base, display or print data, and update the data in 
numerical or alphabetical form;

[[Page 832]]

    (iii) Hardware, in addition to that required for the data base, 
which will include visual display terminal(s) with an attached keyboard, 
connected to the data base hardware components by telecommunication 
networks;
    (iv) Software which will include system programs for data recall and 
input, budget calculation capability when not included in the data base 
system, printout and display for data entry and inquiry terminals, and 
for network control; and
    (v) Technological safeguards and managerial procedures which will be 
established and applied to computer hardware, software, and data, in 
accordance with paragraph (p) of this section, in order to ensure the 
protection of the integrity of the system and individual privacy. System 
security shall be inherent in the system and provided for in the 
Implementation APD submitted for approval. The system will process 
machine readable data files used for the authorized exchange of 
information between levels of government (i.e., State to State, State to 
Federal).
    (5) Approval of the Planning APD and Implementation APD for payment 
by FCS of costs at the 63 percent level will be limited to:
    (i) Planning and design, i.e., requirements and systems analyses, 
feasibility studies, preliminary cost benefits analyses, alternatives 
analyses, and general systems design;
    (ii) Development, i.e., detailing of system and program 
specifications, programming and testing;
    (iii) Procurement of ADP equipment and/or services; and
    (iv) Installation, i.e., conversion, training of staff, and turnover 
to operational status.
    (6) Costs may not be funded at 63 percent when the approved system 
produces automated processing of food stamp recipient applications, 
issuance authorizations or other reports (operations) on a continuing 
basis for use by State agency personnel for administration of the Food 
Stamp Program. Operations include the use of purchased or rented 
computer equipment and software directly required for and used in the 
operation of the automated data processing and information retrieval 
system. For ADP development projects with phased installation and 
implementation, counties, districts or other subdivisions of the State 
shall be considered operational at the time that the approved system 
produces automated application processing and/or issuance authorizations 
for the food stamp caseload for that subdivision of the State. Pilot 
testing and an initial period of parallel processing for test purposes 
may be considered developmental costs and eligible for 63 percent 
funding for the period of time specified in the approved APD, unless an 
extension is subsequently approved by FCS.
    (7) If FCS suspends approval of an APD in the course of a State 
agency's planning, design, development, or installation, the 63 percent 
level of funding shall not be allowable for any costs incurred until 
such time as the conditions for approval are met.
    (8) Incident to the activities listed in paragraph (g)(5) of this 
section, a State agency may seek payment for the following expenses at a 
63 percent level.
    (i) Personnel. Salaries, wages, travel, and benefits of personnel 
actually engaged in design, development, or installation of approved ADP 
systems.
    (ii) Materials, equipment, facilities, and supplies. Costs of 
materials, equipment, facilities and supplies used in design, 
development, or installation of approved ADP systems. Only the 
proportionate share of the costs of capital assets assignable to the 
period of time or prorated for usage may be claimed during the design, 
development, or installation of these systems. This share must be 
determined based on acquisition costs and/or depreciation or approved 
usage rates. Data with respect to such costs shall be submitted with the 
request for funding.
    (iii) Contracted services. Services obtained under the provisions of 
contracts which meet the procurement standards of this part for the 
design, development, or installation of FCS approved systems.
    (iv) Management studies and preparation of other planning documents. 
The cost of planning activities, which were approved for enhanced 
funding under a planning APD, may be funded at the 63

[[Page 833]]

percent level regardless of final approval or denial of the 
Implementation APD.
    (h) Emergency acquisition requirements. The State agency may request 
FFP for the costs of ADP equipment and services acquired to meet 
emergency situations which preclude the State agency from following the 
prior approval requirements of Sec. 277.18(c). FCS may provide FFP in 
emergency situations if the following conditions are met:
    (1) The State agency must submit a written request to FCS prior to 
the acquisition of any ADP equipment or services. The written request 
must be sent by registered mail and shall include:
    (i) A brief description of the ADP equipment and/or services to be 
acquired and an estimate of their costs;
    (ii) A brief description of the circumstances which result in the 
State agency's need to proceed with the acquisition prior to obtaining 
formal FCS approval; and
    (iii) A description of the adverse impact which would result if the 
State agency does not immediately acquire the ADP equipment and/or 
services.
    (2) Upon receipt of a written request for emergency acquisition FCS 
shall provide a written response to the State agency within 14 days. The 
FCS response shall:
    (i) Inform the State agency that the request has been disapproved 
and the reason for disapproval; or,
    (ii) Inform the State agency that FCS recognizes that an emergency 
situation exists and the State agency must submit a formal request for 
approval by FCS which includes the information specified at 
Sec. 277.18(d)(2) within 90 days from the date of the State agency's 
initial written request.
    (iii) If FCS approves the request submitted under paragraph (h)(1) 
of this section, FFP will be available from the date the State agency 
acquires the ADP equipment and services.
    (i) Cost determination and claiming costs--(1) Cost determination. 
Actual costs must be determined in compliance with an FCS approved 
budget and appendix A to this part, and must be reconcilable with the 
FCS funding level. There shall be no payments pursuant to this section 
to the extent that a State agency is reimbursed for such costs pursuant 
to any other Federal program or uses ADP systems for purposes not 
connected with the Food Stamp Program. The State agency approved cost 
allocation plan must be amended to disclose the methods which will be 
used to identify and classify costs to be claimed. This methodology must 
be submitted to FCS as part of the request for FCS approval of funding 
as required in paragraph (d)(3) of this section. Any costs funded 
pursuant to these regulations shall be excluded in determining the State 
agency's administrative costs under any other section of this part.
    (2) Cost identification for purposes of FFP claims. State agencies 
shall assign and claim the costs incurred under an approved APD in 
accordance with the following criteria:
    (i) Development costs. Using its normal departmental accounting 
system, the State agency shall specifically identify what items of costs 
constitute development costs, assign these costs to specific project 
cost centers, and distribute these costs to funding sources based on the 
specific identification, assignment and distribution outlined in the 
approved APD. The methods for distributing costs set forth in the APD 
should provide for assigning identifiable costs, to the extent 
practicable, directly to program/functions. The State agency shall amend 
the cost allocation plan required by Sec. 277.9 to include the approved 
APD methodology for the identification, assignment and distribution of 
the development costs.
    (ii) Operational costs. Costs incurred for the operation of an ADP 
system shall be identified and assigned by the State agency to funding 
sources in accordance with the approved cost allocation plan required by 
Sec. 277.9.
    (iii) Service agreement costs. States that operate a central data 
processing facility shall use their approved central service cost 
allocation plan required by OMB Circular A-87 to identify and assign 
costs incurred under service agreements with the State agency. The State 
agency shall then distribute these costs to funding sources in 
accordance with paragraphs (i)(2)(i) and (i)(2)(ii) of this section.

[[Page 834]]

    (3) Capital expenditures. The State agency shall charge the costs of 
ADP equipment having unit acquisition costs or total aggregate costs, at 
the time of acquisition, of more than $25,000 by means of depreciation 
or use allowance, unless a waiver is specifically granted by FCS. If the 
equipment acquisition is part of an APD that is subject to the prior 
approval requirements of paragraph (c)(2) of this section, the State 
agency may submit the waiver request as part of the APD.
    (4) Claiming costs. Prior to claiming funding under this section the 
State agency shall have complied with the requirements for obtaining 
approval and prior approval of Sec. 277.18(c).
    (5) Budget authority. FCS approval of requests for funding shall 
provide notification to the State agency of the budget authority and 
dollar limitations under which such funding may be claimed. FCS shall 
provide this amount as a total authorization for such funding which may 
not be exceeded unless amended by FCS. FCS's determination of the amount 
of this authorization shall be based on the budget submitted by the 
State agency. Activities not included in the approved budget, as well as 
continuation of approved activities beyond scheduled deadlines in the 
approved plan, shall require FCS approval of an amended State budget for 
payment. Requests to amend the budget authorization approved by FCS 
shall be submitted to FCS prior to claiming such expenses.
    (j) Procurement requirements. (1) Procurements of ADP equipment and 
services are subject to the procurement standards prescribed by 
Sec. 277.14 regardless of any conditions for prior approval, except the 
requirements of Sec. 277.14(b)(1) and (2) regarding review of proposed 
contracts. Those standards include a requirement for maximum practical 
open and free competition regardless of whether the procurement is 
formally advertised or negotiated.
    (2) The standards prescribed by Sec. 277.14, as well as the 
requirement for prior approval, apply to ADP services and equipment 
acquired by a State or local agency, and the ADP services and equipment 
acquired by a State or local central data processing facility primarily 
to support the Food Stamp Program.
    (3) The competitive procurement policy prescribed by Sec. 277.14 
shall be applicable except for ADP services provided by the agency 
itself, or by other State or local agencies.
    (k) Access to the system and records. Access to the system in all 
aspects, including but not limited to design, development, and 
operation, including work performed by any source, and including cost 
records of contractors and subcontractors, shall be made available by 
the State agency to FCS or its authorized representatives at intervals 
as are deemed necessary by FCS, in order to determine whether the 
conditions for approval are being met and to determine the efficiency, 
economy and effectiveness of the system. Failure to provide full access 
by appropriate State and Federal representatives to all parts of the 
system shall result in suspension and/or termination of Food Stamp 
Program funds for the costs of the system and its operation.
    (l) Ownership rights--(1) Software--(i) The State or local 
government shall include a clause in all procurement instruments which 
provides that the State or local government shall have all ownership 
rights in any software or modifications thereof and associated 
documentation designed, developed or installed with FFP under this 
section.
    (ii) FCS reserves a royalty-free, nonexclusive, and irrevocable 
license to reproduce, publish, or otherwise use and to authorize others 
to use for Federal Government purposes, such software, modifications, 
and documentation.
    (iii) Proprietary operating/vendor software packages (e.g., ADABAS 
or TOTAL) which are provided at established catalog or market prices and 
sold or leased to the general public shall not be subject to the 
ownership provisions in paragraphs (l)(1)(i) and (l)(1)(ii) of this 
section. FFP is not available for proprietary applications software 
developed specifically for the Food Stamp Program.
    (2) Automated data processing equipment. The policies and procedures 
governing title, use and disposition of property purchased with Food 
Stamp Program funds, which appear at 7 CFR

[[Page 835]]

277.13 are applicable to automated data processing equipment.
    (m) Use of ADP systems. ADP systems designed, developed or installed 
with FFP shall be used for the period of time specified in the APD, 
unless FCS determines that a shorter period is justified.
    (n) Basis for continued Federal financial participation. FCS will 
continue FFP at the levels approved in the Planning APD and the 
Implementation APD provided that project development proceeds in 
accordance with the conditions and terms of the approved APD and that 
ADP resources are used for the purposes authorized. FCS will use the APD 
Update to monitor ADP project development. The submission of the report 
prescribed in Sec. 277.18(e) for the duration of project development is 
a condition for continued FFP. In addition, periodic onsite reviews of 
ADP project development and State and local agency ADP operations may be 
conducted by or for FCS to assure compliance with approved APD's, proper 
use of ADP resources, and the adequacy of State or local agency ADP 
operations.
    (o) Disallowance of Federal financial participation. If FCS finds 
that any ADP acquisition approved under the provisions of Sec. 277.18(c) 
fails to comply with the criteria, requirements, and other undertakings 
described in the approved or modified APD, payment of FFP may be 
disallowed.
    (p) ADP system security requirements and review process--(1) ADP 
system security requirements. State and local agencies are responsible 
for the security of all ADP projects under development, and operational 
systems involved in the administration of the Food Stamp Program. State 
and local agencies shall determine appropriate ADP security requirements 
based on recognized industry standards or standards governing security 
of Federal ADP systems and information processing.
    (2) ADP security program. State agencies shall implement and 
maintain a comprehensive ADP Security Program for ADP systems and 
installations involved in the administration of the Food Stamp Program. 
ADP Security Programs shall include the following components.
    (i) Determination and implementation of appropriate security 
requirements as prescribed in paragraph (p)(1) of this section.
    (ii) Establishment of a security plan and, as appropriate, policies 
and procedures to address the following areas of ADP security:
    (A) Physical security of ADP resources;
    (B) Equipment security to protect equipment from theft and 
unauthorized use;
    (C) Software and data security;
    (D) Telecommunications security;
    (E) Personnel security;
    (F) Contingency plans to meet critical processing needs in the event 
of short- or long-term interruption of service;
    (G) Emergency preparedness; and
    (H) Designation of an Agency ADP Security Manager.
    (iii) Periodic risk analyses. State agencies shall establish and 
maintain a program for conducting periodic risk analyses to ensure that 
appropriate, cost-effective safeguards are incorporated into new and 
existing systems. In addition, risk analyses shall be performed whenever 
significant system changes occur.
    (3) ADP system security reviews. State agencies shall review the ADP 
system security of installations involved in the administration of the 
Food Stamp Program on a biennial basis. At a minimum, the reviews shall 
include an evaluation of physical and data security, operating 
procedures, and personnel practices. State agencies shall maintain 
reports of their biennial ADP system security reviews, together with 
pertinent supporting documentation, for Federal on-site review.
    (4) Applicability. The security requirements of this section apply 
to all ADP systems used by State and local governments to administer the 
Food Stamp Program.
    (5) Costs. Costs incurred for complying with the provisions of 
paragraphs (p)(1) through (p)(3) of this section are considered regular 
administrative costs which are funded at the regular FFP level unless 
they are incurred during the development of an ADP system funded at the 
63 percent FFP rate, in

[[Page 836]]

accordance with paragraph (g) of this section.

[Amdt. 319, 55 FR 4355, Feb. 7, 1990, as amended by Amdt. 345, 57 FR 
11259, Apr. 1, 1992; Amdt. 342, 59 FR 2733, Jan. 19, 1994; Amdt. 368, 61 
FR 33643, June 28, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 277.19  Alien verification activities.

    (a) General. This section establishes the standards and procedures 
for Federal Financial Participation (FFP) for State and local costs 
incurred in the verification of the documented alien status of FSP 
applicants through the SAVE Program, as outlined in Sec. 272.11. These 
costs are eligible for 100 percent FFP under the terms and conditions of 
this section. In addition, any such costs funded at the 100 percent rate 
must be necessary and reasonable in the judgment of FCS, based on cost 
benefit analysis and/or other methods determined by FCS.
    (b) Funding. Upon submission to and approval by FCS of a budget, or 
budget revisions, and the attachment to the State Plan of Operations 
required by Sec. 272.11(e), State agencies will be funded at the 100 
percent FFP rate for all allowable direct and indirect costs in 
accordance with the requirements contained in this section.
    (c) Eligible costs. The following costs are eligible for 100 percent 
FFP:
    (1) Personnel. Charges for time spent by State and local employees 
in the verification of the documented alien status of Food Stamp Program 
applicants through the SAVE Program. The allocated share of indirect 
costs attributable to this staff is also an allowable charge. All such 
costs, both direct and indirect, shall be documented through the use of 
time sheets or time studies, or through another method specified in the 
State Plan of Operations and approved by FCS.
    (2) Equipment and supplies. Charges for equipment and supplies in 
proportion to their use in implementing and operating the SAVE Program 
by the State and/or local agencies. ADP equipment may only be acquired 
following prior approval by FCS. FCS approval shall be obtained as 
prescribed by Sec. 277.18. Non-ADP equipment having a net unit cost of 
$25,000 or more must also receive prior FCS approval for such charges.
    (3) Fees and other charges. Charges for fees and other costs 
attributable to the implementation and operation of the SAVE Program by 
State and local agencies are allowable. Specifically, any fees charged 
for the use of the Immigration and Naturalization Service's alien 
verification system are allowable. Any other charges, such as use 
allowances for space used by alien verification units are allowable.
    (d) Ineligible costs. Costs reimbursable at the 100 percent FFP rate 
are limited to those costs incurred in the implementation and operation 
of the SAVE Program as outlined in Sec. 272.11. Costs associated with 
routine certification and verification activities, including mandatory 
alien verification procedures as described in Sec. 273.2(f)(1)(ii), are 
eligible for funding as prescribed by Sec. 277.4(b).
    (e) Budget submittals. The State agency shall include a projection 
of anticipated costs for the implementation and operation of the SAVE 
Program as part of the normal submittal of the State Food Stamp Program 
budget, as required by Sec. 277.3, or as a revision to a budget 
previously submitted. These costs shall be included in the column for 
``other'' expenses on the Budget Projection Statement (FCS-366A) and 
identified separately on an attachment to the FCS-366A.
    (f) Reporting. Expenditures for the implementation and operation of 
the SAVE Program shall be reported on the Financial Status Report (SF-
269) in the column containing ``other'' expenses. SAVE Program 
expenditures shall also be separately identified in an attachment to be 
submitted with each quarterly SF-269 report. Any costs requiring prior 
approval by FCS shall not be claimed until approved.


[53 FR 39443, Oct. 7, 1988]

 Appendix A to Part 277--Principles for Determining Costs Applicable to 
       Administration of the Food Stamp Program by State Agencies

    This appendix sets forth the procedures implementing uniform 
requirements for the negotiations and approval of cost allocation plans 
with State agencies, in accordance with the provisions of Federal 
Management Circular (FMC) 74-4 and OASC-10, ``Cost

[[Page 837]]

Principles and Procedures for Establishing Cost Allocation Plans and 
Indirect Cost Rates for Grants and Contracts with the Federal 
Government,'' U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. This 
material is adapted substantially from the circular; changes have been 
made only when necessary in order to conform with legislative 
constraints.
    (A) Purpose and scope.
    (1) Objectives. This appendix sets forth principles for determining 
the allowable costs of administering the Food Stamp Program by State 
agency under FCS-approved State Plans of Operation. The principles are 
for the purpose of cost determination and are not intended to identify 
the circumstances or dictate the extent of Federal and State or local 
participation in the financing of the Program. They are designed to 
provide that all federally assisted programs bear their fair share of 
costs recognized under these principles, except where restricted or 
prohibited by law. No provision for profit or other increment above cost 
is intended.
    (2) Policy guides. The application of these principles is based on 
the fundamental premises that:
    (a) State agencies are responsible for the efficient and effective 
administration of the Food Stamp Program through the application of 
sound management practice.
    (b) The State agency assumes the responsibility for seeing that Food 
Stamp Program funds have been expended and accounted for consistent with 
underlying agreements and program objectives.
    (c) Each State agency, in recognition of its own unique combination 
of staff facilities and experience, will have the primary responsibility 
for employing whatever form of organization and management techniques as 
may be necessary to assure proper and efficient administration.
    (3) Application. These principles will be applied by FCS in 
determining costs incurred by State agencies receiving FCS payments for 
administering the Food Stamp Program.
    (B) Definitions.
    Approval or authorization by FCS means documentation evidencing 
consent prior to incurring specific costs.
    Cognizant Federal Agency means the Federal agency recognized by OMB 
as having the predominate interest in terms of program dollars.
    Cost allocation plan means the documentation identifying, 
accumulating, and distributing allowable costs of program administration 
together with the allocation methods used.
    Cost, as used herein, means cost as determined on a cash, accrual, 
or other basis acceptable to FCS as a discharge of the State agency's 
accountability for FCS funds.
    Cost center means a pool, summary account, objective or area 
established for the accumulation of costs. Such areas include objective 
organizational units, functions, objects or items of expense, as well as 
ultimate cost objective(s) including specific costs, products, projects, 
contracts, programs and other operations.
    Federal agency means FCS and also any department, agency, 
commission, or instrumentality in the executive branch of the Federal 
Government which makes grants to or contracts with State or local 
governments.
    Payments for administrative costs means reimbursement or advances 
for costs to State agencies pursuant to any agreement whereby FCS 
provides funds to carry out programs, services, or activities in 
connection with administration of the Food Stamp Program. The principles 
and policies stated in this appendix as applicable to program payments 
in general also apply to any State agency obligations under a cost 
reimbursement type of agreement performed by a subagency, including 
contracts and subcontracts.
    Food Stamp Program administration means those activities and 
operations of the State agency which are necessary to carry out the 
purposes of the Food Stamp Act, including any portion of the Program 
financed by the State agency.
    Local unit means any political subdivision of government below the 
State level.
    Other agencies of the State means departments or agencies of the 
State or local unit which provide goods, facilities, and services to a 
State agency.
    Subagencies means the organization or person to which a State agency 
makes any payment for acquisition of goods, materials or services for 
use in administering the Food Stamp Program and which is accountable to 
the State agency for the use of the funds provided.
    Service, as used herein, means goods and facilities, as well as 
services.
    Supporting services means auxiliary functions necessary to sustain 
the direct effort of administering the Program. These services may be 
centralized in the State agency or in some other agency, and include 
procurement, payroll, personnel functions, maintenance and operation of 
space, data processing, accounting, budgeting, auditing, mail and 
messenger service, and the like.
    (C) Basic guidelines.
    (1) Factors affecting allowability of costs. To be allowable under 
the Program, costs must meet the following general criteria:
    (a) Be necessary and reasonable for proper and efficient 
administration of the Program, be allocable thereto under these 
principles, and, except as specifically provided herein, not be a 
general expense required to carry out the overall responsibilities of 
State or local governments.

[[Page 838]]

    (b) Be authorized or not prohibited under State or local laws or 
regulations.
    (c) Conform to any limitations or exclusions set forth in these 
principles, Federal Laws, or other governing limitations as to types or 
amounts of cost items.
    (d) Be consistent with policies, regulations, and procedures that 
apply uniformly to both federally assisted and other activities of the 
unit of government of which the State agency is a part.
    (e) Be accorded consistent treatment through application of 
generally accepted accounting principles appropriate to the 
circumstances.
    (f) Not be allocable to or included as a cost to any other federally 
financed program in either the current or a prior period.
    (g) Be the net of all applicable credits.
    (2) Allocable costs.
    (a) A cost allocable to a particular cost objective to the extent of 
benefits received by such objective.
    (b) Any cost allocable to a particular program or cost objective 
under these principles may not be shifted to other Federal programs to 
overcome fund deficiencies, avoid restrictions imposed by law or grant 
agreement, or for other reasons.
    (c) Where an allocation of joint cost will ultimately result in 
charges to the Program, an allocation plan will be required as 
prescribed in section I of these principles.
    (3) Applicable credits.
    (a) Applicable credits refer to those receipts or reduction of 
expenditure-type transactions which offset or reduce expense items 
allocable to programs as direct or indirect costs. Examples of such 
transactions are: Purchase discounts; rebates or allowances; recoveries 
or indemnities on losses; sale of publications, equipment, and scrap; 
income from personal or incidental services; and adjustments of 
overpayments or erroneous charges.
    (b) Applicable credits may also arise when Federal funds are 
received or are available from sources other than FCS to finance 
operations or capital items donated or financed by the Federal 
Government to fulfill matching requirements under another program. These 
types of credits should likewise be used to reduce related expenditures 
in determining the rates or amounts applicable to a given program.
    (D) Composition of cost.
    (1) Total cost. The total cost of a program is comprised of the 
allowable direct cost incident to its performance, plus its allocable 
portion of allowable indirect costs, less applicable credit.
    (2) Classification costs. There is no universal rule for classifying 
certain costs as either direct or indirect under every accounting 
system. A cost may be direct with respect to some specific service or 
function, but indirect with respect to a program or other ultimate cost 
objective. However, it is essential that each item of cost be treated 
consistently either as a direct or an indirect cost. Specific guides for 
determining direct and indirect costs allocable under the Program are 
provided in the section which follows.
    (E) Direct costs.
    (1) General. Direct costs are those that can be identified 
specifically with a particular cost objective. These costs may be 
charged directly to the Program, contracts, or to other programs against 
which costs are finally lodged. Direct costs may also be charged to cost 
objectives used for the accumulation of costs pending distribution in 
the course to programs and other ultimate costs objectives.
    (2) Application. Typical direct costs chargeable to the Program are:
    (a) Compensation of employees for the time and effort devoted 
specifically to the administration of the Program.
    (b) Cost of materials acquired, consumed, or expended specifically 
for the purpose of the Program.
    (c) Equipment and other approved capital expenditures.
    (d) Other items of expense incurred specifically for efficiently and 
effectively administering the Program.
    (e) Service furnished specifically for the Program by other 
agencies, provided such charges are consistent with criteria outlined in 
section G of these principles.
    (F) Indirect costs.
    (1) General. Indirect costs are those (a) incurred for a common or 
joint purpose benefiting more than one cost objective, and (b) not 
readily assignable to the cost objectives specifically benefited, 
without effort disproportionate to the result achieved. The term 
indirect cost as used herein applies to costs of this type originating 
in the State agency, as well as those incurred by other departments in 
supplying goods, services, and facilities, to the State agency. To 
facilitate equitable distribution of indirect expenses to the cost 
objectives served, it may be necessary to establish a number of pools of 
indirect costs within a State agency or in other agencies providing 
services to a State agency. Indirect cost pools should be distributed to 
benefiting cost objectives on bases which will produce an equitable 
result in consideration of relative benefits derived.
    (2) State agency indirect costs. All State agency indirect costs, 
including the various levels of supervision, are eligible for allocation 
to the program provided they meet the conditions set forth in their 
principles. In lieu of determining the actual amount of State agency 
indirect cost allocable to the program the following methods may be 
used:
    (a) Predetermined fixed rates for indirect costs. A predetermined 
fixed rate for computing indirect costs applicable to program 
administration may be negotiated annually in

[[Page 839]]

situations where the cost experience and other pertinent facts available 
are deemed sufficient to enable the parties to reach an informed 
judgment (1) as to the probable level of indirect costs in the State 
agency during the period to be covered by the negotiated rate, and (2) 
that the amount allowable under the predetermined rate would not exceed 
actual indirect costs.
    (b) Negotiated lump sum for overhead. A negotiated fixed amount in 
lieu of indirect costs may be appropriate under circumstances where the 
benefits derived from a State agency's indirect services cannot be 
readily determined as in the case of a small self-contained or isolated 
activity. When this method is used, a determination should be made that 
the amount negotiated will be approximately the same as the actual 
indirect cost that may be incurred. Such amounts negotiated in lieu of 
indirect costs will be treated as an offset to total indirect expenses 
of the State agency before allocation to remaining activities. The base 
on which such remaining expenses are allocated should be appropriately 
adjusted.
    (3) Limitation on indirect costs.
    (a) Some Federal programs may be subject to laws that limit the 
amount of indirect cost that may be allowed. Agencies that sponsor 
programs of this type will establish procedures which will assure that 
the amount actually allowed for indirect costs under each such program 
does not exceed the maximum allowable under the statutory limitation or 
the amount otherwise allowable under these principles, whichever is the 
smaller.
    (b) When the amount allowable under a statutory limitation is less 
than the amount otherwise allocable as indirect costs under these 
principles, the amount not recoverable as indirect costs under a program 
may not be shifted to another federally sponsored program or contract.
    (G) Cost incurred by other agencies of the State.
    (1) General. The cost of service provided by other agencies may only 
include allowable direct costs of the service plus a pro rata share of 
allowable supporting costs and supervision directly required in 
performing the service, but not supervision of a general nature such as 
that provided by the head of a department and his staff assistants not 
directly involved in operations. However, supervision by the head of a 
department or agency whose sole function is providing the service 
furnished would be an eligible cost. Supporting costs include those 
furnished by other units of the supplying department or by other 
agencies.
    (2) Alternative methods of determining indirect cost. In lieu of 
determining actual indirect cost related to a particular service 
furnished by other agencies of the State, either of the following 
alternative methods may be used provided only one method is used for a 
specific service during the fiscal year involved.
    (a) Standard indirect rate. An amount equal to ten percent of direct 
labor cost in providing the service performed by other agencies of the 
State (excluding overtime, shift, or holiday premiums, and fringe 
benefits) may be allowed in lieu of actual allowable indirect cost for 
that service.
    (b) Predetermined fixed rate. A predetermined fixed rate for 
indirect cost of the unit or activity providing service may be 
negotiated as set forth in section F(2)(a) of these principles.
    (H) Cost incurred by State agency for others. The principles 
provided in section G will also be used in determining the cost of 
services provided by the State agency to another agency.
    (I) Cost allocation plan.
    (1) A cost allocation will be required to support the distribution 
of any indirect costs. All costs allocable to the Food Stamp Program 
under cost allocation plans will be supported by formal accounting 
records which will substantiate the propriety of eventual charges.
    (2) There are two types of cost allocation plans:
    (a) Statewide or central service cost allocation plan identifies and 
distributes the cost of services provided by support organizations to 
those departments or units participating in Federal programs.
    (b) Indirect cost proposals distribute the administrative or joint 
costs incurred by the State agency and the cost of service allocable to 
it under the Statewide or central service cost allocation plan in a 
ratio to all work performed by the State agency. The process involves 
applying a percentage relationship of indirect cost to direct cost.
    (3) Requirements. The cost allocation plan of the State agency shall 
cover all allocated costs of the department as well as costs to be 
allocated under plans of other agencies or organizational units which 
are to be included in the costs of federally sponsored programs. The 
cost allocation plans of all the agencies rendering services to the 
State agency, to the extent feasible, should be presented in a single 
document.
    (4) Instructions for preparation of cost allocation plans. The 
Department of Health and Human Services, in consultation with the other 
Federal agencies concerned, will be responsible for developing and 
issuing the instructions for use by State agencies in preparation of 
cost allocation plans. This responsibility applies to both central 
support services at the State and local government level and indirect 
cost proposals of individual State agencies.
    (5) Submitting plans for approval.
    (a) Responsibility for approving cost allocation plans for 
individual State agencies

[[Page 840]]

has been assigned by the Office of Management and Budget to the 
cognizant Federal agency.
    (b) State cost allocation plans must be submitted to the cognizant 
Federal agency within six months after the last day of the State's 
fiscal year. Upon request by the State agency, an extension of time for 
submittal of the cost allocation plan may be granted by the cognizant 
Federal agency. It is essential that cost allocation plans be submitted 
in a timely manner. Failure to submit the plans when required will cause 
the State agency to become delinquent. In the event a State becomes 
delinquent, FCS will not provide for the recovery of central service and 
indirect costs, and such costs already made and claimed against Food 
Stamp Program funds will be subject to disallowance.
    (6) Negotiation and approval of cost allocation plans for States. 
The cognizant Federal agency, in collaboration with Federal agencies 
concerned, will be responsible for negotiation, approval, and audit of 
cost allocation plans.
    (7) Negotiation and approval of cost allocation plans for local 
governments. Cost allocation plans will be retained at the local 
government level for audit by the cognizant Federal agency except in 
those cases where that agency requests that cost allocation plans be 
submitted to it for negotiation and approval.
    (8) A current list of cognizant Federal agencies is maintained by 
the Office of Management and Budget.
    (9) Resolution of problems. The Office of Management and Budget will 
lend assistance in resolving problems encountered by Federal agencies on 
cost allocation plans.
    (10) Approval by FCS. FCS reserves the right to disapprove costs not 
meeting the general criteria outlined in section C of these principles. 
FCS shall promptly notify the State agency in writing of the 
disapproval, the reason for the disapproval and the effective date. 
Costs incurred by State agencies after disapproval may not be charged to 
FCS unless if FCS subsequently approves the cost.

                  Standards for Selected Items of Cost

    A. Allowable cost. Standards for allowability of costs are 
established by Federal Management Circular 74-4. These standards will 
apply regardless of whether a particular item of cost is treated as 
direct or indirect. Failure to mention a particular item of cost in 
these standards is not intended to imply that it is either allowable or 
unallowable. Rather, determination of allowability in each case should 
be based on the treatment of standards provided for similar or related 
items of cost. The allowability of the selected items of cost is subject 
to the general policies and principles as stated in Attachment A to 
Federal Management Circular 74-4.
    (1) Accounting. The cost of establishing and maintaining accounting 
and other information systems required for the management of the Food 
Stamp Program is allowable. This includes costs incurred by central 
service agencies of the State government for these purposes. The cost of 
maintaining central accounting records required for overall State or 
local government purposes, such as appropriation and fund accounts by 
the Treasurer, Comptroller, or similar officials, is considered to be a 
general expense of government and is not allowable.
    (2) Advertising. Advertising media includes newspapers, magazines, 
radio and television programs, direct mail, trade papers, and the like. 
The advertising costs allowable are those which are solely for:
    (a) Recruitment of personnel required for the Program;
    (b) Solicitation of bids for the procurement of goods and services 
required;
    (c) Disposal of scrap or surplus materials acquired in the 
performance of the agreement; and
    (d) Other purposes specifically provided for by FCS regulations or 
approved by FCS in the administration of the Food Stamp Program.
    (3) Advisory councils. Costs incurred by State advisory councils or 
committees established to carry out Food Stamp Program goals are 
allowable. The cost of like organizations is allowable when used to 
improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the Program.
    (4) Audit service. The cost of audits necessary for the 
administration and management of functions related to the Program is 
allowable.
    (5) Bonding. Costs of premiums on bonds covering employees who 
handle Food Stamp Program funds or food coupons are allowable. The 
amount of allowable coverage shall be limited to the anticipated maximum 
amount of food stamp funds or food coupons handled at one time by that 
employee.
    (6) Budgeting. Costs incurred for the development, preparation, and 
execution of budgets are allowable. Costs for services of a central 
budget office are generally not allowable since these are costs of 
general government. However, where employees of the central budget 
office actively participate in the State agency's budget process, the 
cost of services identifiable to the Food Stamp Program are allowable.
    (7) Building lease management. The administrative cost for lease 
management which includes review of lease proposals, maintenance of a 
list of available property for lease, and related activities is 
allowable.
    (8) Central stores. The cost of maintaining and operating a central 
stores organization for supplies, equipment, and materials used either 
directly or indirectly for the Food Stamp Program is allowable.

[[Page 841]]

    (9) Communications. Communication costs incurred for telephone calls 
or service, telegraph, teletype service, wide area telephone service 
(WATS), centrex, telpak (tie lines), postage, messenger service and 
similar expenses are allowable.
    (10) Compensation for personal services.
    (a) General. Compensation for personal services includes all 
remuneration, paid currently or accrued, for services rendered during 
the period of performance in the administration of the program including 
but not necessarily limited to wages, salaries, and supplementary 
compensation and benefits as defined in section A.(13) of these 
principles. The costs of such compensation are allowable to the extent 
that total compensation for individual employees: is reasonable for the 
services rendered; follows an appointment made in accordance with State 
or local government laws and rules and which meets Federal Merit System 
or other requirements, where applicable; and is determined and supported 
as provided in section A of these principles. Compensation for employees 
engaged in federally assisted activities will be considered reasonable 
to the extent that it is consistent with that paid for similar work in 
other activities of the State or local government. In cases where the 
kinds of employees required for the Food Stamp Program activities are 
not found in the other activities of the State or local government, 
compensation will be considered reasonable to the extent that it is 
comparable to that paid for similar work in the labor market in which 
the employing government competes for the kind of employees involved. 
Compensation surveys providing data representative of the labor market 
involved will be an acceptable basis for evaluating reasonableness.
    (b) Payroll and distribution of time. Amounts charged to the program 
for personal services, regardless of whether treated as direct or 
indirect costs, will be based on payrolls documented and approved in 
accordance with the generally accepted practice of the State or local 
agency. Payrolls must be supported by time and attendence or equivalent 
records for individual employees. Distribution of salaries and wages of 
employees chargeable to more than one program or other cost objective 
will be supported by appropriate time reports or approved time study 
methodologies. The method used should be included in the cost allocation 
plan and should be approved by FCS.
    (11) Depreciation and use allowance.
    (a) State agencies may be compensated for the use of buildings, 
capital improvements, and equipment through use allowances or 
depreciation. Use allowances are the means of providing compensation in 
lieu of depreciation or other equivalent costs. However, a combination 
of the two methods may not be used in connection with a single class of 
fixed assets.
    (b) The computation of depreciation or use allowances will be based 
on acquisition cost. Where actual cost records have not been maintained, 
a reasonable estimate of the original acquisition cost may be used in 
the computation. The computation will exclude the cost of any portion of 
the cost of buildings and equipment donated or borne directly or 
indirectly by the Federal Government through charges to Federal programs 
or otherwise, irrespective of where title was originally vested or where 
it presently resides. In addition, the computation will also exclude the 
cost of acquisition of land. Depreciation or a use allowance on idle or 
excess facilities is not allowable, except when specifically authorized 
by FCS.
    (c) Where the depreciation method is followed, adequate property 
records must be maintained, and any generally accepted method of 
computing depreciation may be used. However, the method of computing 
depreciation must be consistently applied for any specific asset or 
class of assets for all affected federally sponsored programs and must 
result in equitable charges considering the extent of the use of the 
assets for the benefit of such programs.
    (d) In lieu of depreciation, a use allowance for buildings and 
improvements may be computed at an annual rate not exceeding two percent 
of acquisition cost. The use allowance for equipment (excluding items 
properly capitalized as building cost) will be computed at an annual 
rate not exceeding six and two-thirds percent of acquisition cost of 
usable equipment.
    (e) No depreciation or use charge may be allowed on any assets that 
would be considered as fully depreciated, provided, however, that 
reasonable use charges may be negotiated for any such assets if 
warranted after taking into consideration the cost of the facility or 
item involved, the estimated useful life remaining at time of 
negotiation, the effect of any increased maintenance charges or 
decreased efficiency due to age, and any other factors pertinent to the 
utilization of the facility or item for the purpose contemplated.
    (12) Disbursing service. The cost of disbursing program funds by the 
State Treasurer or other designated officer is allowable. Disbursing 
services cover the processing of checks or warrants, from preparation to 
redemption, including the necessary records of accountability and 
reconciliation of such records with related cash accounts.
    (13) Employee fringe benefits. Costs identified are allowable to the 
extent that total compensation for employees is reasonable as defined in 
paragraph (10)(a) of these principles.
    (a) Employee benefits in the form of regular compensation paid to 
employees during periods of authorized absences from the job, such as 
for annual leave, sick leave, court

[[Page 842]]

leave, military leave, and the like, if they are provided pursuant to an 
approved leave system, and the cost thereof is equitably allocated to 
all related activities, including federally assisted programs.
    (b) Employee benefits in the form of employers' contributions or 
expense for social security, employees' life and health insurance plans, 
unemployment insurance coverage, workers' compensation insurance, 
pension plans, severance pay, and the like, provided such benefits are 
granted under approved plans and are distributed equitably to programs 
and to other activities.
    (14) Employee morale, health And welfare costs. The costs of health 
or first-aid clinics and/or infirmaries, recreational facilities, 
employees' counseling services, employee information publications, and 
any related expenses incurred in accordance with general State or local 
policy, are allowable. Income generated from any of these activities 
will be offset against expenses.
    (15) Exhibits. Costs of exhibits relating specifically to the Food 
Stamp Program are allowable.
    (16) Legal expenses. The cost of legal expenses required in the 
administration of the program is allowable. Legal services furnished by 
the chief legal officer of a State or local government or his staff 
solely for the purpose of discharging his general responsibilities as 
legal officer are unallowable. Legal expenses for the prosecution of 
claims against the Federal Government is unallowable.
    (17) Maintenance and repair. Costs incurred for necessary 
maintenance, repair, or upkeep of property which neither add to the 
permanent value of the property nor appreciably prolong its intended 
life, but keep it in an efficient operating condition, are allowable.
    (18) Materials and supplies. The cost of materials and supplies 
necessary to carry out the program is allowable. Purchases made 
specifically for the program should be charged thereto at their actual 
prices after deducting all cash discounts, trade discounts, rebates, and 
allowances received by the State agency. Withdrawals from general stores 
or stockrooms should be charged at cost under any recognized method of 
pricing consistently applied. Incoming transportation charges are a 
proper part of material cost.
    (19) Memberships, subscriptions and professional activities.
    (a) The cost of membership in civic, business, technical, and 
professional organizations is allowable, provided:
    (i) The benefit from the membership is related to the program,
    (ii) The expenditure is for agency membership,
    (iii) The cost of the membership is reasonably related to the value 
of the services or benefits received, and
    (iv) The expenditure is not for membership in an organization which 
devotes a substantial part of its activities to influencing legislation.
    (b) Reference material. The cost of books, and subscriptions to 
civic, business, professional, and technical periodicals is allowable 
when related to the program.
    (c) Meetings and conferences. Costs are allowable when the primary 
purpose of the meeting is the dissemination of technical information 
relating to the program and they are consistent with regular practices 
followed for other activities of the State agency.
    (20) Motor pools. The costs of a service organization which provides 
automobiles to user State agencies at a mileage or fixed rate and/or 
provides vehicle maintenance, inspection and repair services are 
allowable.
    (21) Payroll preparation. The cost of preparing payrolls and 
maintaining necessary wage records is allowable.
    (22) Personnel administration. Costs for the recruitment, 
examination, certification, classification, training, establishment of 
pay standards, and related activities for the program are allowable.
    (23) Printing and reproduction. Cost for printing and reproduction 
services necessary for program administration including but not limited 
to forms, reports, manuals, and information literature, is allowable. 
Publication costs of reports or other media relating to program 
accomplishments or results are allowable.
    (24) Procurement service. The cost of procurement service, including 
solicitation of bids, preparation and award of contracts, and all phases 
of contract administration in providing goods, facilities and services 
for the program is allowable.
    (25) Taxes. In general, taxes or payments in lieu of taxes which the 
State agency is legally required to pay are allowable.
    (26) Training and education. The cost of in-service training, 
customarily provided for employee development which directly or 
indirectly benefits the program is allowable. Out-of-service training 
involving extended periods of time is allowable only when specifically 
authorized by FCS.
    (27) Transportation. Costs incurred for freight, cartage, express, 
postage, and other transportation costs relating either to goods 
purchased, delivered, or moved from one location to another are 
allowable.
    (28) Travel. Travel costs are allowable for expenses for 
transportation, lodging, subsistence, and related items incurred by 
employees who are in travel status on official business incident to the 
program. Such costs may be charged on an actual basis, on a per diem or 
mileage basis in lieu of actual costs incurred, or on a combination of 
the two. The charges must be consistent with those normally allowed in 
like circumstances in

[[Page 843]]

nonfederally sponsored activities. The difference in cost between first-
class air accommodations and less-than-first-class air accommodations is 
unallowable except when less-than-first-class air accommodations are not 
reasonably available. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs C (7) 
and (10), travel costs of officials covered by those paragraphs, when 
specifically related to grant programs, are allowable with the prior 
approval of a grantor agency.
    B. Costs allowable with approval of FCS.
    (1) Automated Data Processing. The costs of acquiring data 
processing equipment and services used in the administration of the Food 
Stamp Program are allowable. The costs of ADP equipment and services 
acquisitions to be funded at the 63 percent rate or which exceed the 
prior approval cost thresholds specified in Sec. 277.18(c) are allowable 
upon the prior written approval of FCS. Requests for prior approval of 
such costs shall be in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 277.18.
    (2) Building space and related facilities. The cost of space in 
privately or publicly owned buildings used for the benefit of the 
Program is allowable subject to the following conditions.
    (a) The total cost of space, whether in a privately or publicly 
owned building, may not exceed the rental cost of comparable space and 
facilities in a privately owned building in the same locality.
    (b) The cost of space may not be charged to FCS for periods of 
nonoccupancy, without authorization of FCS.
    (i) Rental cost. The rental cost of space in a privately-owned 
building is allowable.
    (ii) Maintenance and operation. The cost of utilities, insurance, 
security, janitorial services, elevator service, upkeep of grounds, 
normal repairs and alterations and the like, are allowable to the extent 
they are not otherwise included in rental or other charges for space.
    (iii) Rearrangements and alterations. Costs incurred for 
rearrangement and alteration of facilities required specifically for the 
program or those that materially increase the value or useful life of 
the facilities (section B(3) of these principles) are allowable when 
specifically approved by FCS.
    (iv) Depreciation and use allowances on publicly owned buildings. 
These costs are allowable as provided in paragraph A(11) of these 
principles.
    (v) Occupancy of space under rental-purchase or a lease with option-
to-purchase agreement. The cost of space procured under such 
arrangements is allowable when specifically approved by FCS.
    (3) Capital expenditures. The cost, net of any credits, of 
facilities, equipment, other capital assets, and repairs which 
materially increase the value or useful life of capital assets, and/or 
of nonexpendable personal property, having a useful life of more than 
one year and a net acquisition cost of more than $5,000 per unit after 
allocation to FCS as projected for one year after purchase, is allowable 
when such procurement is specifically approved by FCS. No such approval 
shall be granted unless the State agency shall demonstrate to FCS that 
such a cost is:
    (a) Necessary and reasonable for proper and efficient administration 
of the program, and allocable thereto under the principles provided 
herein; and
    (b) That procurement of such item or items has been or will be made 
in accordance with the standards set out in Sec. 277.14. In no case 
shall such a cost become a program charge against FCS prior to approval 
in writing by FCS of the procurement and the cost. When assets acquired 
with Food Stamp funds are (i) sold, (ii) no longer available for use in 
a federally sponsored program, or (iii) used for purposes not authorized 
by FCS, FCS's equity in the asset will be refunded in the same 
proportion as Federal participation in its cost. In case any assets are 
traded on new items, only the net cost of the newly acquired assets is 
allowable.
    (4) Insurance.
    (a) Cost of insurance to secure the State agency against financial 
losses involved in the acceptance, storage, and issuance of food coupons 
and ATP cards is allowable with FCS approval.
    (b) Costs of other insurance in connection with the general conduct 
of activities are allowable subject to the following limitations:
    (i) Types and extent and cost of coverage will be in accordance with 
general State or local government policy and sound business practice.
    (ii) Costs of insurance or contributions to any reserve covering the 
risk of loss of, or damage to, Federal Government property are 
unallowable except to the extent that FCS approves such cost.
    (5) Management studies. The cost of management studies to improve 
the effectiveness and efficiency of program management for the Food 
Stamp Program is allowable. However, FCS must approve cost in excess of 
$2,500 for studies performed by outside consultants or agencies other 
than the State agency.
    (6) Preagreement costs. Costs incurred prior to the effective date 
of approval of the amended indirect cost proposal or the revised 
Statewide cost allocation plan, whether or not they would have been 
allowable thereunder if incurred after such date, are allowable only 
when subsequently provided for in the plan or approved indirect cost 
proposal.
    (7) Professional services. Cost of professional services rendered by 
individuals or organizations not a part of the State agency is 
allowable. Prior authorization must be obtained from FCS for cost 
exceeding a total of $2,500.

[[Page 844]]

    (8) Proposal costs. Costs of preparing indirect cost proposals or 
amendments for allocating, distributing, and implementing provisions for 
payment of portions of the costs of administering the Food Stamp Program 
by the State agency are allowable.
    (9) Cost incurred by agencies other than the State. The cost of 
services provided by other agencies (including municipal governments) 
may only include allowable direct costs plus a pro rata share of 
allowable supporting costs and supervision directly required in 
performing the service. Allowable supporting costs are those services 
which may be centralized and includes such functions as procurement, 
payroll, personnel services, maintenance and operation of space, data 
processing, accounting, budgeting, auditing, mail and messenger service 
and the like. Supervision costs will not include supervision of a 
general nature such as that provided by the head of a department and his 
staff assistants not directly involved in the operation of the program. 
In lieu of determining actual indirect cost related to a particular 
service performed by another agency, either of the following alternative 
methods may be used during the fiscal year involved and is specifically 
provided for in the indirect cost proposal:
    (a) Standard indirect rate equal to ten percent of direct labor cost 
in providing the service (excluding overtime, shift or holiday premiums, 
and fringe benefits) may be allowed in lieu of actual allowable cost.
    (b) A predetermined fixed rate for indirect cost of the unit or 
activity providing service may be negotiated.
    C. Unallowable costs. The following costs shall not be allowable:
    (1) Costs of determining food stamp eligibility incidental to the 
determination of AFDC eligibility are not chargeable to FCS.
    (2) Bad debts. Any losses arising from uncollectable accounts or 
other claims, and related costs, are unallowable.
    (3) Contingencies. Contributions to a contingency reserve or any 
similar provision for unforeseen events are unallowable.
    (4) Contributions and donations. Unallowable.
    (5) Entertainment. Costs whose purpose is for amusement, social 
activities, and incidental costs relating thereto, such as meals, 
beverages, lodgings, rentals, transportation, and gratuities are 
unallowable.
    (6) Fines and penalties. Costs resulting from violations of or 
failure to comply with Federal, State and local laws and regulations are 
unallowable.
    (7) Governor's expenses. The salaries and expenses of the Office of 
the Governor of a State or the chief executive of a political 
subdivision are considered a cost of general State or local government 
and are unallowable. However, for a federally-recognized Indian tribal 
government, only that portion of the salaries and expenses of the office 
of the chief executive that is a cost of general government is 
unallowable. The portion of salaries and expenses directly attributable 
to managing and operating programs is allowable.
    (8) Indemnification. The cost of indemnifying the State against 
liabilities to third parties and other losses not compensated by 
insurance is unallowable.
    (9) Interest and other financial costs. Interest on borrowings, bond 
discounts, cost of financing and refinancing operations, and legal and 
professional fees paid in connection therewith, are unallowable.
    (10) Legislative expenses. Salaries and other expenses of the State 
legislature or similar local governmental bodies are unallowable.
    (11) Losses. Losses which could have been covered by permissible 
insurance are unallowable.
    (12) Underrecovery of cost under agreements. Any excess of cost over 
Federal contribution under one agreement is unallowable under another 
agreement.
    (13) The acquisition of land or buildings is an unallowable cost.

[Amdt. 188, 45 FR 85702, Dec. 30, 1980, as amended by Amdt. 207, 47 FR 
52338, Nov. 19, 1982; Amdt. 298, 52 FR 36400, Sept. 29, 1987; Amdt. 316, 
54 FR 24531, June 7, 1989; Amdt. 319, 55 FR 4361, Feb. 7, 1990; Amdt. 
342, 59 FR 2733, Jan. 19, 1994]


<R03>
PART 278--PARTICIPATION OF RETAIL FOOD STORES, WHOLESALE FOOD CONCERNS AND INSURED FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
278.1  Approval of retail food stores and wholesale food concerns.
278.2  Participation of retail food stores.
278.3  Participation of wholesale food concerns.
278.4  Procedure for redeeming coupons.
278.5  Participation of insured financial institutions.
278.6  Disqualification of retail food stores and wholesale food 
          concerns, and imposition of civil money penalties in lieu of 
          disqualifications.
278.7  Determination and disposition of claims--retail food stores and 
          wholesale food concerns.
278.8  Administrative review--retail food stores and wholesale food 
          concerns.
278.9  Implementation of amendments relating to the participation of 
          retail food stores, wholesale food concerns and insured 
          financial institutions.
278.10  [Reserved]

    Authority: 7 U.S.C. 2011-2032.


[[Page 845]]


    Editorial Note: OMB control numbers relating to this part 278 are 
contained in Sec. 271.8.


<R05>
Sec. 278.1  Approval of retail food stores and wholesale food concerns.

    (a) Application. Any firm desiring to participate in the program 
shall file an application as prescribed by FCS. The FCS officer in 
charge shall deny or approve authorization, or request more information, 
within 30 days of receipt of the application.
    (b) Determination of authorization. An applicant shall provide 
sufficient data on the nature and scope of the firm's business for the 
FCS officer in charge to determine whether the applicant's participation 
will further the purposes of the program. In making this determination 
the FCS officer in charge shall consider all of the following:
    (1) The nature and extent of the food business conducted by the 
applicant. (i) Retail food stores which sell primarily food for home 
preparation and consumption and in which one or more staple food items, 
as defined in Sec. 271.2, make up more than 50 percent of eligible food 
sales shall normally be considered to have food business of a nature and 
extent which will further the purposes of the program. These stores 
shall include: Full-line grocery stores; convenience stores; stores 
which sell meat, poultry, or, fish; stands which sell agricultural 
commodities; farmers markets; milk routes; bread routes; day-old bread 
stores; bakeries which sell bread; and nonprofit cooperative food-
purchasing ventures which are properly licensed to sell food in the 
state and locality in which they are operating.
    (ii) Firms whose primary business is not the sale of food for home 
preparation and consumption, but who have recognized grocery departments 
in which staple foods make up more than 50 percent of eligible food 
sales, shall normally be considered to have food business of a nature 
and extent which will qualify the store for participation in the 
program. In determining whether a store's staple food business is 
sufficient for the store to qualify for participation in the program, 
the FCS officer in charge shall also consider:
    (A) The volume of staple food business the store does;
    (B) The amount of sales of staple foods compared to other business 
conducted by the firm; and
    (C) The availability of other authorized food stores in the area.
    (iii) Wholesale food concerns whose primary business is the sale of 
eligible food at wholesale, and in which one or more staple food items, 
as defined in Sec. 271.2, make up more than 50 percent of eligible food 
sales, shall normally be considered to have adequate food business for 
the purposes of the program.
    (iv) No co-located wholesale/retail food concern with 50 percent or 
less of its total sales in retail food sales may be authorized to redeem 
food stamps unless it meets the criteria applicable to all retail firms 
and:
    (A) It is a legitimate retail food outlet. Indicators which may 
establish to FCS that a firm is a legitimate retail food outlet include, 
but are not limited to, the following:
    (1) The firm's marketing structure; as may be determined by factors 
such as, but not limited to:
    (i) A retail business license;
    (ii) The existence of sales tax records documenting retail food 
sales; and/or separate bookkeeping records; and
    (2) The way the firm holds itself out to the public as evidenced by 
factors such as, but not limited to:
    (i) The layout of the retail sales space;
    (ii) The use of retail advertisements;
    (iii) The posting of retail prices;
    (iv) Offering specials to attract retail customers;
    (v) Hours of operation for retail business;
    (vi) Parking area for retail customers; and
    (B) It has total annual retail food sales of at least $250,000; or
    (C) It is a legitimate retail outlet but fails to meet the 
requirements in paragraph (b)(1)(iv)(B) of this section, and not 
authorizing such a firm would cause hardship to food stamp households. 
Hardship would occur in any one of the following circumstances:
    (1) Program recipients would have difficulty in finding authorized 
firms to accept their coupons for eligible food;
    (2) Special ethnic foods would not otherwise be available to 
recipients; or

[[Page 846]]

    (3) Recipients would be deprived of an opportunity to take advantage 
of unusually low prices offered by the firm if no other authorized firm 
in the area offers the same types of food items at comparable prices.
    (2) The volume of coupon business which FCS may reasonably expect 
the firm to do. The FCS officer in charge may consider such factors as 
the location of a store and previous food sales volumes in evaluating 
the ability of an applicant firm to attract food stamp business.
    (3) The business integrity and reputation of the applicant. The FCS 
officer in charge may consider:
    (i) Criminal conviction records reflecting on the honesty or 
integrity of officers or managers of the applicant firm;
    (ii) Official records of removal from other Federal, State, or local 
programs;
    (iii) Judicial determinations in civil litigation adversely 
reflecting on the integrity of officers or managers of the applicant 
firm;
    (iv) Evidence of an attempt to circumvent a period of 
disqualification from the food stamp program or a civil money penalty 
imposed for violations of the Food Stamp Act and this part;
    (v) Evidence of prior fraudulent behavior of officers, managers or 
employees of the applicant firm; and
    (vi) Any other evidence reflecting on the business integrity and 
reputation of the applicant.
    (4) Bonding for firms with previous sanctions. (i) If the applicant 
firm has been sanctioned for violations of this part, by withdrawal or 
disqualification from program participation, or by a civil money 
penalty, the FCS officer-in-charge shall, as a condition of future 
authorization, require the applicant to present a collateral bond which:
    (A) Is issued by a bonding agent recognized under the law of the 
State in which the applicant is conducting business, and which is 
represented by a negotiable certificate only.
    (B) Is payable to the Food and Consumer Service, U.S. Department of 
Agriculture;
    (C) Cannot be canceled by the bonding agent for non-payment of the 
premium by the applicant;
    (D) Has a face value of $1,000 or an amount equal to ten percent of 
the average monthly coupon redemption volume of the applicant for the 
immediate twelve months prior to the effective date of the most recent 
sanction which necessitated the bond, whichever amount is greater;
    (E) Is valid at all times during which the firm is authorized to 
participate in the program; and
    (F) Remains in the custody of the officer-in-charge unless released 
to the applicant as a result of the withdrawal of the applicant's 
authorization, without a fiscal claim established against the applicant 
by FCS.
    (ii) Furnishing a collateral bond shall not eliminate or reduce a 
firm's obligation to pay in full any civil money penalty or previously 
determined fiscal claim which may have been assessed against the firm by 
FCS prior to the time the bond was required by FCS, and furnished by the 
firm. A firm which has been assessed a civil money penalty shall pay FCS 
as required, any subsequent fiscal claim asserted by FCS. In such cases 
a collateral bond shall be furnished to FCS with the payment, or a 
schedule of intended payments, of the civil money penalty. A buyer or 
transferee shall not, as a result of the transfer or purchase of a 
disqualified firm, be required to furnish a bond prior to authorization.
    (5) Taxpayer identification numbers. At the time of an initial 
request for authorization as well as reauthorization, an applicant firm 
must provide its employer identification number and social security 
numbers as described below:
    (i) Employer Identification Number. The firm must provide its 
employer identification number (EIN) if one has been assigned to the 
firm by the Internal Revenue Service. The authority to request EINs and 
the guidelines for requesting EINs are set forth in section 6109(f) of 
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and Treas. Reg. Sec. 301.6109-2 (26 
CFR 301.6109-2).
    (ii) Social Security Number. In addition to the EIN, the firm must 
provide the social security numbers (SSNs) of the following individuals:
    (A) The SSN of an owner of a sole proprietorship.

[[Page 847]]

    (B) The SSNs of general partners of firms which are partnerships.
    (C) The SSNs of up to five of the largest shareholders (owners) of 
privately owned corporations. (For purposes of this section, a privately 
owned corporation is one which has shares or stock that are not traded 
on a stock exchange or available for purchase by the general public.)
    (6) Other factors. Any other factors which the FCS officer in charge 
considers pertinent to the application under consideration.
    (c) Wholesalers. A wholesale food concern may be authorized to 
accept coupons only from a specified customer or customers if it meets 
the requirements of paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section, and FCS 
determines it is required as a redemption outlet:
    (1) For one or more specified authorized drug addict or alcoholic 
treatment programs,
    (2) For one or more specified authorized group living arrangements,
    (3) For one or more specified authorized shelters for battered women 
and children,
    (4) For one or more specified authorized nonprofit cooperative food-
purchasing ventures,
    (5) For one or more specified authorized public or private nonprofit 
homeless meal providers, or
    (6) For one or more specified authorized retail food stores which 
are without access to an insured financial institution which will redeem 
their coupons.

No firm may be authorized to accept and redeem coupons concurrently as 
both a retail food store and a wholesale food concern. Authorizations of 
wholesale food concerns granted prior to January 28, 1982 shall expire 
on May 31, 1982. Wholesale food concerns desiring to participate in the 
program after that date must reapply for authorization in accordance 
with the provisions of this paragraph.
    (d) Meal services. A meal delivery service or communal dining 
facility desiring to prepare and serve meals to households eligible to 
use coupons for those meals in addition to meeting the requirements of 
paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section, must establish that:
    (1) It is recognized as a tax exempt organization by the Internal 
Revenue Service; or
    (2) It is a senior citizens' center or apartment building occupied 
primarily by elderly persons and SSI recipients, and their spouses; or
    (3) It is a restaurant operating under a contract with a State or 
local agency to prepare and serve (or deliver) low-cost meals to 
homeless persons, elderly persons and SSI recipients (and in the case of 
meal delivery services, to elderly persons or handicapped persons) and 
their spouses. Such a facility must have more than 50 percent of its 
total sales in food. The contracts of restaurants must specify the 
approximate prices which will be charged.
    (e) Treatment programs. Drug addict or alcoholic treatment and 
rehabilitation programs wishing to redeem through wholesalers food 
stamps received from or on behalf of their participants shall in 
addition to meeting the requirements of paragraphs (a), (b) and (d)(1) 
of this section, be under Part B of Title XIX of the Public Health 
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300x et seq.). Approval to participate is 
automatically withdrawn once the treatment and rehabilitation program no 
longer meets the criteria which would make it eligible for funding under 
part B of Title XIX (in accordance with the definition in Drug addiction 
or alcoholic treatment and rehabilitation program in Sec.  271.2).
    (f) Group living arrangements. FCS shall authorize as retail food 
stores those group living arrangements wishing to redeem coupons 
directly through wholesalers. The group living arrangement must, in 
addition to meeting requirements of paragraphs (a), (b), and (d)(1) of 
this section, be certified by the appropriate agency or agencies of the 
State under regulations issued under section 1616(e) of the Social 
Security Act or under standards determined by the Secretary to be 
comparable to standards implemented by appropriate State agencies under 
section 1616(e) of the Social Security Act. Approval to participate is 
automatically cancelled at any time that a program loses its 
certification from the State agency or agencies.
    (g) Shelters for battered women and children. FCS shall authorize as 
retail

[[Page 848]]

food stores those shelters for battered women and children wishing to 
redeem coupons directly through wholesalers. The shelter must be public 
or private nonprofit, as defined in paragraph (d)(1) of this section, 
and meet the requirements of paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section. 
Shelters which also serve other groups of individuals must have a 
portion of the facility set aside on a long-term basis to shelter 
battered women and children. Also required is that the shelter be a 
residence which serves meals or provides food to its residents.
    (h) House-to-house trade routes. FCS shall, in consultation with the 
Department's Office of Inspector General, determine those locations 
where the operation of trade routes damages the program's integrity. FCS 
may limit the authorization of house-to-house trade routes to those 
trade routes whose services are required by participating households in 
such areas in order to obtain food. The FCS Officer in Charge, in 
deciding whether households in such areas require a trade route's 
services, shall consider the volume of food business the trade route 
does and the availability of alternate sources of comparable food. An 
FCS official shall inspect any applicant trade route's vehicle to ensure 
that the trade route is a retail food store before authorizing it to 
accept coupons. An FCS official may require, as a condition of 
continuing authorization, that the trade route vehicle be reinspected 
semiannually to ensure that it continues to be a retail food store.
    (i) Private homeless meal providers. FCS may authorize as retail 
food stores those restaurants which contract with the appropriate State 
agency to serve meals to homeless persons at ``concessional'' (low or 
reduced) prices. Restaurants shall be responsible for obtaining 
contracts with the appropriate State agency as defined in Sec. 272.9 and 
for providing a copy of the contract to FCS at the time it applies for 
authorization to accept food stamp benefits. Contracts must specify the 
approximate prices which will be charged. Examples of reduced prices 
include, but are not limited to, a percentage reduction, a set dollar 
amount reduction, a daily special meal, or an offer of a free food item 
or beverage (excluding alcoholic beverages).
    (j) Authorization card. Upon approval, FCS shall issue a 
nontransferable authorization card to the firm. The authorization card 
shall be retained by the firm until superseded, surrendered, or revoked 
as provided in this part.
    (k) Denying authorization. FCS shall deny the application of any 
firm if it determines that:
    (1) The firm does not qualify for participation in the program as 
specified in paragraph (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g) or (h) of this 
section; or
    (2) The firm has failed to pay in full any fiscal claim assessed 
against the firm under Sec. 278.7 or any fines assessed under 
Sec. 278.6(l) or Sec. 278.6(m). The FCS officer in charge shall issue a 
notice to the firm by certified mail or personal service of any 
authorization denial and shall advise the firm that it may request 
review of that determination.
    (l) Withdrawing authorization. (1) FCS shall withdraw the 
authorization of any firm authorized to participate in the program for 
any of the following reasons.
    (i) The firm's continued participation in the program will not 
further the purposes of the program;
    (ii) The firm fails to meet the specifications of paragraph (b), 
(c), (d), (e), (f), (g), or (h) of this section;
    (iii) The firm has been found to be circumventing a period of 
disqualification or a civil money penalty through a purported transfer 
of ownership;
    (iv) The firm has failed to pay fines assessed under Sec. 278.6(l) 
or Sec. 278.6(m); or
    (v) The firm is required under State and/or local law to charge tax 
on eligible food purchased with coupons or to sequence or allocate 
purchases of eligible foods made with coupons and cash in a manner 
inconsistent with 272.1 of these regulations.
    (2) The FCS officer in charge shall issue a notice to the firm by 
certified mail or personal service to inform the firm of the 
determination and of the review procedure. FCS shall remove the firm 
from the program if the firm does not request review within the period 
specified in Sec. 279.5.

[[Page 849]]

    (m) Refusal to accept correspondence or to respond to inquiries. FCS 
may withdraw the authorization of any firm which:
    (1) Refuses to accept correspondence from FCS;
    (2) Fails to respond to inquiries from FCS within a reasonable time; 
or
    (3) Cannot be located by FCS with reasonable effort.
    (n) Periodic reauthorization. At the request of FCS a retail food 
store or wholesale food concern will be required to undergo a periodic 
reauthorization determination by updating any or all of the information 
on the firm's application form. Failure to cooperate in the 
reauthorization process will result in withdrawal of the firm's approval 
to participate in the program.
    (o) Removal from the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program, for 
Women, Infants, and Children (WIC). (1) FCS shall withdraw the Food 
Stamp Program authorization of any firm which is disqualified from the 
WIC Program based in whole or in part on any act which constitutes a 
violation of that program's regulation and which is shown to constitute 
a misdemeanor or felony violation of law, or for any of the following 
specific program violations:
    (i) Claiming reimbursement for the sale of an amount of a specific 
food item which exceeds the store's documented inventory of that food 
item for a specified period of time.
    (ii) Exchanging cash or credit for WIC food instruments;
    (iii) Receiving, transacting and/or redeeming WIC food instruments 
outside of authorized channels;
    (iv) Accepting WIC food instruments from unauthorized persons;
    (v) Exchanging non-food items for a WIC food instrument;
    (vi) Charging WIC customers more for food than non-WIC customers or 
charging WIC customers more than current shelf price; or
    (vii) Charging for food items not received by the WIC customer or 
for foods provided in excess of those listed on the food instrument.
    (2) FCS shall not withdraw the Food Stamp Program authorization of a 
firm which is disqualified from the WIC Program unless prior to the time 
prescribed for securing review of WIC disqualification action, the firm 
was provided notice that it could be withdrawn from the Food Stamp 
Program based on the WIC violation. Once a firm has served the period of 
removal from WIC specified by the State agency, the firm may reapply for 
Food Stamp Program authorization and be approved if otherwise eligible.
    (p) Applications containing false information. The filing of any 
application containing false or misleading information may result in the 
denial or withdrawal of approval to participate in the program and may 
subject the firm and persons responsible to civil or criminal action.
    (q) Administrative review. Any withdrawal or denial of authorization 
to participate in the program shall be subject to administrative review 
under Sec. 278.8.
    (r) Use and disclosure of information provided by firms. With the 
exception of EINs and SSNs, the contents of an initial application, or 
other information required to be submitted by retail food stores and 
wholesale food concerns to determine continued eligibility, such as 
ownership information and sales and redemption data, may be disclosed to 
and used by Federal and State law enforcement and investigative agencies 
for the purpose of administering or enforcing the Food Stamp Act or any 
other Federal or State law, and the regulations issued under the Food 
Stamp Act or such other law. Such disclosure and use shall also include 
companies or individuals under contract for the operation by, or on 
behalf of FCS to accomplish an FCS function. Such purposes include the 
audit and examination of such information by the Comptroller General of 
the United States authorized by any other provision of law. Any person 
who publishes, divulges, discloses, or makes known in any manner or to 
any extent not authorized by Federal law or regulations any information 
obtained under this paragraph shall be fined not more than $1,000 or 
imprisoned not more than 1 year, or both. Safeguards with respect to 
employee identification numbers (EINs) are contained in paragraph (r)(2) 
of this section. Safeguards with respect to Social Security numbers 
(SSNs) are

[[Page 850]]

contained in paragraph (r)(3) of this section.
    (1) Criteria for requesting information. FCS shall determine what 
information can be disclosed and which government agencies have access 
to that information based on the following criteria:
    (i) Federal and State law enforcement or investigative agencies or 
instrumentalities administering or enforcing specified Federal and State 
laws, or regulations issued under those laws, have access to certain 
information maintained by FCS. Such agencies or instrumentalities must 
have among their responsibilities the enforcement of law or the 
investigation of suspected violations of law. However, only certain 
Federal entities have access to information involving SSNs and EINs in 
accordance with paragraph (r)(1)(ii) of this section;
    (ii) Except for SSNs and EINs, information provided to FCS by 
applicants and authorized firms participating in the FSP may be 
disclosed and used by qualifying Federal and State entities in 
accordance with paragraph (r)(1)(i) of this section. The disclosure of 
SSNs and EINs is limited only to qualifying Federal agencies or 
instrumentalities which otherwise have access to SSNs and EINs based on 
law and routine use. Release of information under this paragraph shall 
be limited to information relevant to the administration or enforcement 
of the specified laws and regulations, as determined by FCS;
    (iii) Requests for information must be submitted in writing, 
including electronic communication, and must clearly indicate the 
specific provision of law or regulations which would be administered or 
enforced by access to requested information, and the relevance of the 
information to those purposes. If a formal agreement exists between FCS 
and another agency or instrumentality, individual written requests may 
be unnecessary. FCS may request additional information if needed to 
clarify a request;
    (iv) Disclosure by FCS is limited to: Information about applicant 
stores and concerns with applications on file; information about 
authorized stores participating in the FSP; and information about 
unauthorized entities or individuals illegally accepting or redeeming 
food stamps;
    (v) Requests for information disclosure by FCS may involve a 
specific store or concern, or some or all stores and concerns covered by 
paragraph (r)(1)(iv) of this section. In addition, FCS may sign 
agreements allowing certain government entities direct access to 
appropriate FCS data, with access to EINs and SSNs limited only to other 
Federal agencies and instrumentalities that otherwise have access to 
such numbers.
    (2) Employer identification numbers. (i) The Department may have 
access to the EINs obtained pursuant to paragraph (b)(5) of this section 
for the purpose of establishing and maintaining a list of the names and 
EINs of the stores and concerns for use in determining those applicants 
who previously have been sanctioned or convicted under sections 12 and 
15 of the Food Stamp Act of 1977, as amended, (7 U.S.C. 2021 or 2024). 
The Department also may share EINs with other Federal agencies and 
instrumentalities that otherwise have access to EINs if the Department 
determines that such sharing would assist in verifying and matching such 
information against information maintained by such other agency or 
instrumentality. Any such information shared pursuant to this paragraph 
may be used by the Department or such other agency or instrumentality 
for the purpose of effective administration and enforcement of the Food 
Stamp Act of 1977, as amended, or for the purpose of investigating 
violations of other Federal laws or enforcing such laws. See Treas. Reg. 
Sec. 301.6109-2 (b) and (c) (26 CFR 301.6109-2 (b) and (c)).
    (ii) The only persons permitted access to EINs obtained pursuant to 
paragraph (b) of this section are officers and employees of the United 
States, who otherwise have access and whose duties or responsibilities 
require access to the EINs for the administration or enforcement of the 
Food Stamp Act of 1977, as amended, or for the purpose of investigating 
violations of other Federal laws or enforcing such laws. See Treas. Reg. 
Sec. 301.6109-2(d)(1) (26 CFR 301.6109-2(d)(1)).
    (iii) The Department or any agency or instrumentality of the United

[[Page 851]]

States shall provide for any additional safeguards that the Secretary of 
the Treasury determines to be necessary or appropriate to protect the 
confidentiality of the EINs. The Department may also provide for any 
additional safeguards to protect the confidentiality of EINs so long as 
these safeguards are consistent with any safeguards determined by the 
Secretary of the Treasury to be necessary or appropriate. See Treas. 
Reg. Sec. 301.6109-2(d)(2) (26 CFR 301.6109-2(d)(2)).
    (iv) EINs maintained by the Department or maintained by any agency 
or instrumentality of the United States pursuant to Sec. 278.1(b)(5) are 
confidential. Except as provided in paragraph (r)(2)(ii) of this section 
above, no officer or employee of the United States who has or had access 
to any such EIN may disclose that number in any manner. For purposes of 
paragraph (r)(2)(iv) of this section the term officer or employee 
includes a former officer or employee. See Treas. Reg. Sec. 301.6109-
2(e) (26 CFR 301.6109(e)).
    (v) Sections 7213(a) (1), (2) and (3) of the Internal Revenue Code 
of 1986 apply with respect to the unauthorized, willful disclosure to 
any person of EINs obtained by the Department pursuant to 
Sec. 278.1(b)(5) in the same manner and to the same extent as sections 
7213(a) (1), (2) and (3) apply with respect to unauthorized disclosure 
of returns and return information described in those sections. Section 
7213(a)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 applies with respect to 
the willful offer of any item of material value in exchange for any EIN 
obtained by the Department pursuant to Sec. 278.1(b)(5) in the same 
manner and to the same extent as section 7213(a)(4) applies with respect 
to offers (in exchange for any return or return information) described 
in that section. See Treas. Reg. Sec. 301.6109-2(f) (26 CFR 301.6109-
2(f)).
    (3) Social Security numbers. (i) The Department may have access to 
SSNs obtained pursuant to paragraph (b)(5) of this section for the 
purpose of establishing and maintaining a list of names and SSNs of 
stores and concerns for use in determining those applicants who 
previously have been sanctioned or convicted under section 12 or 15 of 
the Food Stamp Act of 1977, as amended, (7 U.S.C. 2021 or 2024). The 
Department may use this determination of sanctions and convictions in 
administering sections 12 and 15 of the Food Stamp Act of 1977, as 
amended, (7 U.S.C. 2018, 2021). The Department also may share SSNs with 
other Federal agencies and instrumentalities if the Department 
determines that such sharing would assist in verifying and matching such 
information against information maintained by the Department or such 
other agency or instrumentality. Any such information shared pursuant to 
this paragraph shall be used for the purpose of effective administration 
and enforcement of the Food Stamp Act of 1977, as amended, or for the 
purpose of investigating violations of other Federal laws or enforcing 
such laws.
    (ii) The only persons permitted access to SSNs obtained pursuant to 
paragraph (b) of this section are officers and employees of the United 
States, who otherwise have access, and whose duties or responsibilities 
require access to the SSNs for the administration or enforcement of the 
Food Stamp Act of 1977, as amended, or for the purpose of investigating 
violations of other Federal laws or enforcing such laws. Such access 
shall also include companies or individuals under contract for the 
operation by, or on behalf of FCS to accomplish an FCS function.
    (iii) The Department shall provide for all additional safeguards 
that the Secretary of Health and Human Services determines to be 
necessary or appropriate to protect the confidentiality of the SSNs. The 
Department may also provide for any additional safeguards to protect the 
confidentiality of SSNs so long as these safeguards are consistent with 
any safeguards determined by the Secretary of Health and Human Services 
to be necessary or appropriate.
    (iv) The SSNs and related records that are obtained or maintained by 
authorized persons are confidential, and no officer or employee shall 
disclose any such SSN or related record except as authorized. The term 
``related record'' means any record, list, or compilation that 
indicates, directly or indirectly, the identity of any individual with 
respect to whom a request for a SSN is maintained. For purposes of

[[Page 852]]

paragraph (r)(3)(iv) of this section the term ``officer or employee'' 
includes a former officer or employee.
    (v) The sanctions under sections 7213(a) (1), (2) and (3) of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 will apply with respect to the 
unauthorized, willful disclosure to any person of SSNs and related 
records obtained or maintained in the same manner and to the same extent 
as sections 7213(a) (1), (2) and (3) apply with respect to unauthorized 
disclosures of returns and return information described in those 
sections. The sanction under section 7213(a)(4) of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986 will apply with respect to the willful offer of any item of 
material value in exchange for any SSN or related record in the same 
manner and to the same extent as section 7213(a)(4) applies with respect 
to offers (in exchange for any return or return information) described 
in that section.
    (4) FCS initiated matches. Under the restrictions noted in paragraph 
(r) of this section, FCS will periodically initiate cross matches of 
retailer data with other Federal and State agencies' files for the 
purpose of verifying information provided by applicant and participating 
firms, and for the purposes of administering and enforcing other Federal 
or State laws. Such matches could involve all firms participating after 
implementation for the purpose of verifying information such as, but not 
limited to, SSNs and retail sales data.
    (s) Public and Private Nonprofit Homeless Meal Providers. FCS shall 
authorize as retail food stores, those public and private nonprofit 
homeless meal providers which apply and qualify for authorization to 
accept food stamps from homless food stamp recipients. Such meal 
providers must be public or private nonprofit organizations as defined 
by the Internal Revenue Service (I.R.C. 501(c)(3)), must serve meals 
that include food purchased by the provider, must meet the requirements 
of paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section, and must be approved by an 
appropriate State or local agency, pursuant to Sec. 272.9. Public and 
private nonprofit homeless meal providers shall be responsible for 
obtaining approval from an appropriate State or local agency and shall 
provide written documentation of such approval to FCS prior to approval 
of the meal provider's application for authorization. (If such approval 
is subsequently withdrawn, FCS authorization shall be withdrawn). Public 
and private nonprofit homeless meal providers serving meals which 
consist wholly of donated foods shall not be eligible for authorization. 
In an area in which FCS, in consultation with the Department's Office of 
Inspector General, finds evidence that the authorization of a public and 
private nonprofit homeless meal provider would damage the Food Stamp 
Program's integrity, FCS shall limit the participation of that public 
and private nonprofit homeless meal provider, unless FCS determines that 
the establishment or shelter is the only one of its kind serving the 
area.
    (t) Each authorized retail food store shall post in a suitable and 
conspicuous location in the store a sign designed and provided by FCS 
which provides information on how persons may report abuses they have 
observed in the operation of the program. Refusal or repeated failure to 
display such a sign by an authorized retail food store may result in the 
withdrawal of the firm's approval to participate in the program.

[Amdt. 136, 43 FR 43274, Sept. 22, 1978]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 278.1, 
see the List of CFR Sections Affected in the Finding Aids section of 
this volume.

    Effective Date Notes: 1. At 61 FR 53600, Oct. 15, 1996, in 
Sec. 278.1, paragraph (i) was redesignated and a new paragraph (i) was 
added. This paragraph contains information collection and recordkeeping 
requirements and will not become effective until approval has been given 
by the Office of Management and Budget. The Food and Consumer Service 
will publish a document in the Federal Register announcing the effective 
date.

    2. At 61 FR 68121, Dec. 27, 1996, Sec. 278.1 was amended as follows, 
effective Feb. 25, 1997:
    a. The heading and the introductory text of paragraph (r) were 
revised;
    b. Paragraphs (r)(1) and (r)(2) were redesignated as paragraphs 
(r)(2) and (r)(3), respectively, and a new paragraph (r)(1) was added;
    c. Newly redesignated paragraphs (r)(2)(i), (r)(2)(ii), (r)(3)(i), 
and (r)(3)(ii) were revised;
    d. Newly redesignated paragraph (r)(2)(iii) was amended by adding 
after the word ``Department'' in the first sentence the words ``or any 
agency or instrumentality of the

[[Page 853]]

United States'' and by removing the designation ``(c)(2)'' following the 
references to ``Sec. 301.6109-2'' and ``(26 CFR 301.6109-2)'' and adding 
in its place the designation (d)(2);
    e. Newly redesignated paragraph (r)(2)(iv) was amended by adding 
after the word ``Department'' the words ``or maintained by any agency or 
instrumentality of the United States'', by removing the references to 
``Sec. 278.1(s)(1)(ii)'' and ``Sec. 278.1 (r)(1)(iv)'' and adding in 
their place references to ``paragraph (r)(2)(ii) of this section'' and 
``paragraph (r)(2)(iv) of this section'', and by removing the 
designation ``(d)'' following the references to ``Sec. 301.6109-2'' and 
``(26 CFR 301.6109)'' and adding in its place the designation (e);
    f. Newly redesignated paragraph (r)(2)(v) was amended by removing 
the designation ``(e)'' after the references to ``Sec. 301.6109-2'' and 
``(26 CFR 301.6109-2)'' and adding in its place the designation (f);
    g. Newly redesignated paragraph (r)(3)(iv) was amended by removing 
the reference ``Sec. 278.1(q)(2)(iv)'' and adding in its place the 
reference ``paragraph (r)(3)(iv) of this section''; and
    h. A new paragraph (r)(4) was added.

    For the convenience of the user, the superseded text is set forth as 
follows:
Sec. 278.1  Approval of retail food stores and wholesale food concerns.

                                * * * * *

    (r) Safeguarding privacy. Except for employer identification numbers 
(EINs) and social security numbers (SSNs), the contents of applications 
or other information furnished by firms, including information on their 
gross sales and food sales volumes and their redemptions of coupons, may 
not be used or disclosed to anyone except for purposes directly 
connected with the administration and enforcement of the Food Stamp Act 
and these regulations, except that such information may be disclosed to 
and used by State agencies that administer the Special Supplemental 
Nutrition Program for Women, Infants and Children (WIC). Such purposes 
shall not exclude the audit and examination of such information by the 
Comptroller General of the United States authorized by any other 
provision of law. For safeguards with respect to EINs, see 
Sec. 278.1(q)(1) below. For safeguards with respect to SSNs, see 
Sec. 278.1(q)(2) below.
    (1) Employer identification numbers. (i) The Department may have 
access to the EINs obtained pursuant to Sec. 278.1(b)(5) only for the 
purpose of establishing and maintaining a list of the names and EINs of 
the stores and concerns for use in determining those applicants who 
previously have been sanctioned or convicted under section 12 or 15 of 
the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 U.S.C. 2021 or 2024). The Department may 
use this determination of sanctions or convictions in administering 
sections 9 and 12 of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 U.S.C. 2018, 2021). 
See Treas. Reg. Sec. 301.6109-2(b) (26 CFR 301.6109-2(b)).
    (ii) The only persons permitted access to the EINs obtained pursuant 
to Sec. 278.1(b)(5) are officers and employees of the United States 
whose duties or responsibilities require access to the EINs for the 
administration or enforcement of the Food Stamp Act of 1977. See Treas. 
Reg. Sec. 301.6109-2(c)(1) (26 CFR 301.6109-2(c)(1)).

                                * * * * *

    (2) Social Security Numbers. (i) The Department may have access to 
SSNs obtained pursuant to Sec. 278.1(b)(5) only for the purpose of 
establishing and maintaining a list of names and SSNs for use in 
determining those applicants who previously have been sanctioned or 
convicted under section 12 or 15 of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 U.S.C. 
2021 or 2024). The Department may use this determination of sanctions 
and convictions in administering sections 9 and 12 of the Food Stamp Act 
of 1977 (7 U.S.C. 2018, 2021).
    (ii) The only persons permitted access to the SSNs obtained pursuant 
to Sec. 278.1(b)(5) are officers and employees of the United States 
whose duties or responsibilities require access to the SSNs for the 
administration or enforcement of the Food Stamp Act of 1977.

                                * * * * *


<R05>
Sec. 278.2  Participation of retail food stores.

    (a) Use of coupons. Coupons may be accepted by an authorized retail 
food store only from eligible households or the households' authorized 
representative, and only in exchange for eligible food. Coupons may not 
be accepted in exchange for cash, except when cash is returned as change 
in a transaction in which coupons were accepted in payment for eligible 
food under pargraph (d) of this section. Coupons may not be accepted in 
payment of interest on loans or for any other nonfood use. An authorized 
retail food store may not accept coupons from another retail food store, 
except that public or private nonprofit homeless meal providers may 
redeem coupons for eligible food through authorized retail food stores.
    (b) Equal treatment for coupon customers. Coupons shall be accepted 
for eligible foods at the same prices and on

[[Page 854]]

the same terms and conditions applicable to cash purchases of the same 
foods at the same store except that tax shall not be charged on eligible 
foods purchased with coupons. However, nothing in this part may be 
construed as authorizing FCS to specify the prices at which retail food 
stores may sell food. However, public or private nonprofit homeless meal 
providers may only request voluntary use of food stamps from homeless 
food stamp recipients and may not request such household using food 
stamps to pay more than the average cost of the food purchased by the 
public or private nonprofit homeless meal provider contained in a meal 
served to the patrons of the meal service. For purposes of this section, 
``average cost'' is determined by averaging food costs over a period of 
up to one calendar month. Voluntary payments by food stamp recipients in 
excess of such costs may be accepted by the meal providers. The value of 
donated foods from any source shall not be considered in determining the 
amount to be requested from food stamp recipients. All indirect costs, 
such as those incurred in the acquisition, storage, or preparation of 
the foods used in meals shall also be excluded. In addition, if others 
have the option of eating free or making a monetary donation, food stamp 
recipients must be provided the same option of eating free or making a 
donation in money or food stamps. No retail food store may single out 
coupon users for special treatment in any way.
    (c) Accepting coupons. No authorized retail food store may accept 
coupons marked ``paid,'' ``canceled,'' or ``specimen.'' Nor may a retail 
food store accept coupons bearing any cancellation or endorsement, or 
coupons of other than the 1-dollar denomination which have been detached 
from the coupon books prior to the time of purchase or delivery of 
eligible food unless the detached coupons are accompanied by the coupon 
books which bear the same serial numbers that appear on the detached 
coupons. However, in the case of public or private nonprofit homeless 
meal providers, retail food stores may accept detached coupons which 
have been accepted by the homeless meal provider. It is the right of the 
household member or the authorized representative to detach the coupons 
from the book.
    (d) Making change. An authorized retail food store shall use, for 
the purpose of making change, uncanceled and unmarked 1-dollar coupons 
which were previously accepted for eligible foods. If change in an 
amount of less than 1-dollar is required, the eligible household shall 
receive the change in cash. However, in the case of public or private 
nonprofit homeless meal providers, neither cash change nor credit slips 
shall be provided under any circumstances when food stamps are used to 
purchase meals. At no time may cash change in excess of 99 cents be 
returned in a coupon transaction. An authorized retail food store may 
not engage in a series of coupon transactions the purpose of which is to 
provide the same food stamp customer an amount of cash change greater 
than the maximum 99 cents cash change allowed in one transaction.
    (e) Accepting coupons before delivery. Food retailers may not accept 
coupons before delivering the food, retain custody of any unspent 
coupons, or in any way prevent an eligible household from using coupons 
in making purchases from other authorized firms. However, a nonprofit 
cooperative food purchasing venture may accept coupons from a member of 
the cooperative at the time the member places a food order. The food 
ordered must be made available to the member within 14 days from the day 
the cooperative receives the member's coupons.
    (f) Paying credit accounts. Coupons may not be accepted by an 
authorized retail food store in payment for any eligible food sold to a 
household on credit.
    (g) Redeeming coupons. Authorized retail food stores may exchange 
coupons accepted in accordance with this part for face value upon 
presentation through the banking system or through a wholesale food 
concern authorized to accept coupons from that retailer. Authorized drug 
addict or alcoholic treatment and rehabilitation programs, group living 
arrangements, and shelters for battered women and children may present 
coupons for redemption

[[Page 855]]

through authorized wholesale food concerns. A drug addict or alcoholic 
treatment center, group living arrangement, or shelter for battered 
women and children may purchase food in authorized retail food stores as 
the authorized representative of its participating households. Public or 
private nonprofit homeless meal providers may purchase food in 
authorized retail food stores and through authorized wholesale food 
concerns. Authorized drug addict and alcoholic treatment and 
rehabilitation programs, group living arrangements, shelters for 
battered women and children, and public or private nonprofit homeless 
meal providers for homeless food stamp households shall not present 
coupons directly to an insured financial institution for redemption.
    (h) Identifying coupon users. Coupons may not knowingly be accepted 
from persons who have no right to possession of coupons. If a food 
retailer has any cause to believe that a person presenting coupons has 
no right to use the coupons, the food retailer should request the person 
to show the ID card of the household to establish the right of that 
person to use the coupons. Where photo ID cards are in use, the person 
presenting the ID card need not be pictured on the card. Public or 
private nonprofit homeless meal providers redeeming detached coupons 
through retail food stores shall present their retailer authorization 
card as proof of their eligibility to redeem coupons through retail food 
stores.
    (i) Checking meal delivery service recipients. A nonprofit meal 
delivery service shall require the recipient of a delivered meal to show 
the marked ID card establishing the recipient's right to use coupons for 
that service the first time that the recipient offers coupons in payment 
for the service, and shall request the marked ID card at any time the 
nonprofit meal delivery service has cause to question the continued 
eligibility of the recipient to use coupons for delivered meals.
    (j) Checking hunting and fishing equipment users. Authorized Alaskan 
retailers shall require coupon customers wanting to purchase hunting and 
fishing equipment with coupons to show their ID cards to determine that 
they live in an area designated by FCS as one in which persons are 
dependent upon hunting and fishing for subsistence.
    (k) Checking participants in restaurants. A restaurant operating 
under a State contract shall require a household purchasing meals to 
show the marked ID card establishing the household's right to purchase 
meals with coupons unless the personnel of the restaurant know that the 
program participant tendering coupons is eligible to use coupons to 
purchase meals.
    (l) Checking public or private nonprofit homeless meal provider 
recipients. Public or private nonprofit homeless meal providers shall 
establish a food stamp patron's right to purchase meals with coupons.

[Amdt. 136, 43 FR 43274, Sept. 22, 1978, as amended at Amdt. 191, 46 FR 
50277, Oct. 9, 1981; Amdt. 205, 46 FR 60167, Dec. 8, 1981; Amdt. 257, 49 
FR 32538, Aug. 15, 1984; Amdt. 286, 52 FR 7557, Mar. 11, 1987; 53 FR 
31649, Aug. 19, 1988; Amdt. 344, 56 FR 54778, Oct. 23, 1991; Amdt. 356, 
59 FR 29714, June 9, 1994; Amdt. 343, 61 FR 53601, Oct. 15, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 278.3  Participation of wholesale food concerns.

    (a) Accepting coupons. An authorized wholesale food concern may 
accept endorsed coupons from one or more specified authorized retail 
food stores, from one or more specified authorized nonprofit cooperative 
food-purchasing ventures, from one or more specified authorized group 
living arrangements, from one or more specified authorized drug addict 
or alcoholic treatment programs, from one or more specified authorized 
shelters for battered women and children, or, from one or more specified 
public or private nonprofit homeless meal providers if the coupons are 
accompanied by a properly filled-out and signed redemption certificate, 
and are not marked ``paid,'' ``canceled,'' or ``specimen.'' A wholesaler 
authorized to accept coupons from an authorized drug addict or alcoholic 
treatment program, or from an authorized group living arrangement, or 
from an authorized shelter for battered women and children, or from one 
or more public or private nonprofit homeless meal providers may accept 
coupons from that treatment program, or group living arrangement, or 
shelter

[[Page 856]]

for battered women and children, or from one or more public or private 
nonprofit homeless meal providers, only in exchange for food.
    (b) Accepting legally obtained coupons. No authorized wholesale food 
concern may accept coupons if the wholesaler knows or has reasonable 
cause to believe that the coupons were not legally obtained for eligible 
food.
    (c) Redeeming coupons. An authorized wholesale food concern may 
redeem coupons, properly accepted from retailers, through the banking 
system, upon presentation of the coupons with:
    (1) The authorized retail food store's properly filled-out and 
signed redemption certificate for the coupons; and
    (2) The authorized wholesale food concern's properly filled-out and 
signed redemption certificate.
    (d) Handling retailer redemption certificates. No authorized 
wholesale food concern may alter, prepare, or complete an authorized 
retail food store's redemption certificate.

[Amdt. 136, 43 FR 43274, Sept. 22, 1978, as amended by Amdt. 173, 46 FR 
62810, Dec. 29, 1981; Amdt. 286, 52 FR 7558, Mar. 11, 1987; Amdt. 344, 
56 FR 54778, Oct. 23, 1991; Amdt. 343, 61 FR 53601, Oct. 15, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 278.4  Procedure for redeeming coupons.

    (a) Coupons accepted without authorization. Coupons accepted by a 
retail food store or a wholesale food concern before the receipt by the 
firm of an authorization card from FCS may not be presented for 
redemption unless the FCS officer in charge has approved the redemption 
under Sec. 278.7(b). Burned or mutilated coupons shall be presented for 
redemption to the FCS officer in charge as provided in Sec. 278.7(c).
    (b) Endorsing coupons. Each authorized retail food store or 
authorized wholesale food concern shall mark its authorization number or 
name on each coupon before it presents the coupons for redemption.
    (c) Using redemption certificates. FCS will provide all authorized 
firms with redemption certificates. Wholesale food concerns and retail 
food stores, except for drug addict and alcoholic treatment and 
rehabilitation programs and public or private nonprofit homeless meal 
providers, shall use the redemption certificates to present coupons to 
insured financial institutions for credit or for cash. All retail food 
stores which wish to redeem coupons at wholesale food concerns shall use 
the redemption certificates for that purpose. An authorized retail firm 
using redemption certificates to redeem coupons shall fill out the 
redemption certificate to show the value of the coupons redeemed, the 
name of the insured financial institution or wholesaler, the date, and 
the signature and title of the official of the firm redeeming coupons.

[Amdt. 136, 43 FR 43274, Sept. 22, 1978, as amended by Amdt. 286, 52 FR 
7558, Mar. 11, 1987; Amdt. 344, 56 FR 54778, Oct. 23, 1991; Amdt. 343, 
61 FR 53601, Oct. 15, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 278.5  Participation of insured financial institutions.

    (a) Accepting coupons. (1) Financial institutions that are insured 
by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) or financial 
institutions which are insured under the Federal Credit Union Act and 
which have retail food stores or wholesale food concerns in their field 
of membership may redeem coupons only from authorized retail food 
stores, meal services, and wholesale food concerns in accordance with 
the rules contained in this part and instructions of the Federal Reserve 
Banks. No financial institution may impose on or collect from a retail 
food store a fee or other charge for redemption of coupons that are 
submitted to the financial institution in a manner consistent with the 
requirements, except for coupon cancellation, for the presentation of 
coupons by the financial institution to the Federal Reserve banks. 
Coupons submitted to insured financial institutions for credit or cash 
must be properly endorsed in accordance with Sec. 278.4 of this part and 
shall be accompanied by a properly completed and signed redemption 
certificate. All verified and encoded redemption certificates accepted 
by insured financial institutions shall be forwarded with the 
corresponding coupon deposits to the Federal Reserve Bank along with the 
accompanying Food Coupon Deposit Document (Form FCS-521). In accordance 
with Federal Reserve requirements, the coupon deposit value entered on 
the Food Coupon Deposit

[[Page 857]]

Document must be equal to the actual value of coupons being deposited 
and to the total value of verified amounts encoded on the corresponding 
redemption certificates.
    (2) An insured financial institution shall verify the amount of the 
coupons being redeemed and record the amount in the designated space on 
the redemption certificate. In order to conform with Federal Reserve 
requirements, the verified amount shall be recorded in the appropriate 
field on the redemption certificate using Magnetic Ink Character 
Recognition (MICR) encoding. Redemption certificates accepted by insured 
financial institutions shall be forwarded with the corresponding coupon 
deposits to the Federal Reserve Bank along with the Food Coupon Deposit 
Document (Form FCS-521).
    (3) Redeemed coupons must be indelibly cancelled on the face of the 
coupon by the first insured financial institution receiving them. If the 
cancellation on the coupon face does not show the depositing 
institution's name or its routing symbol transit number, this 
identifying information must appear on the straps affixed to each bundle 
of coupons of like denomination. Deposits not meeting these cancellation 
requirements may be returned to the depositing institution for 
reprocessing. Retail food stores may not be required to cancel the 
coupons by the insured financial institution nor may the insured 
financial institution charge the retail food stores a fee or other 
charge for cancellation of coupons. A portion of a coupon consisting of 
less than three-fifths of a whole coupon may not be redeemed.
    (4) Insured financial institutions which are members of the Federal 
Reserve System, insured nonmember clearing institutions, and insured 
nonmember institutions which have arranged with a Federal Reserve Bank 
to deposit coupons for credit to the account of a member institution on 
the books of a Federal Reserve Bank may forward coupons directly to the 
Federal Reserve Bank. Other insured financial institutions may forward 
cancelled coupons through ordinary collection channels.
    (b) Role of Federal Reserve Banks. Federal Reserve Banks, acting as 
fiscal agents of the United States, will receive canceled coupons for 
collection as cash items from armed forces installations, member insured 
financial institutions of the Federal Reserve System, nonmember clearing 
insured financial institutions, and nonmember insured financial 
institutions which have arranged with a Federal Reserve Bank to deposit 
coupons for credit to the account of a member insured financial 
institution on the books of the Federal Reserve Bank, and will charge 
those items to the general account of the Treasurer of the United 
States.
    (c) FCS liability for losses. FCS shall not be liable for the value 
of any coupons lost, stolen, or destroyed while in the custody of an 
insured financial institution or for the value of coupons lost, stolen, 
or destroyed while in transit from an insured financial institution to a 
Federal Reserve Bank.
    (d) FCS use of coupons to detect violations. Regardless of any other 
provision in these regulations, coupons may be issued to, purchased by, 
or redeemed by persons authorized by FCS to use those coupons in 
examining and inspecting program operations, and for other purposes 
determined by FCS to be required for proper administration of the 
program. Coupons which have been so issued and used, as well as any 
coupons which have been issued under paragraph (g) of this section, or 
which FCS believes may have been issued, transferred, negotiated, used, 
or received in violation of this subchapter or of any applicable 
statute, shall at the request of FCS and on issuance of a receipt for 
them be turned over to FCS by the insured financial institution 
receiving the coupons, or by any other person to whom the request is 
addressed, together with any certificate(s) of redemption accompanying 
the coupons. Any coupons so requested shall not be eligible for 
redemption through Federal Reserve Banks or other collection channels. 
However, FCS may redeem coupons from any insured financial institution 
or person by payment of the face amount of the coupons upon 
determination by FCS that this direct redemption of coupons is 
warranted. FCS shall determine the proper disposition of any coupons 
held by FCS on completion of the examination or inspection

[[Page 858]]

in which the coupons were used. Claims or demands for unredeemed coupons 
surrendered to FCS may be mailed to the local FCS field office for the 
project area involved.
    (e) Selling coupons to stores for internal checks. FCS may sell 
coupons at face value to any authorized retail food store which wishes 
to use coupons to conduct internal checks of coupon transactions. The 
retail food store must submit a written request to FCS which shall 
include a certification that the store recognizes that its use of 
coupons will not affect FCS action to enforce program regulations and 
that the requested coupons will be used only for internal checks of the 
store's employees and only to uncover sales of items other than eligible 
foods. The request shall also include the name of the city or county in 
which the stores to be checked through the use of the requested coupons 
are located and the name and address of any outside agency with which 
the retail food store has or will have a contract to conduct checks of 
the store's employees using coupons. The request shall be directed to 
the Benefit Redemption Division, FSP, FCS, U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, 3101 Park Center Drive, Alexandria, VA 22302, and shall be 
accompanied by a check or money order made payable to the Food and 
Consumer Service to cover the face value cost of the coupons requested. 
Coupons bought by retail food stores for use in internal checks may be 
later redeemed for full value in accordance with Sec. 278.4, and in 
redeeming those coupons, retail food stores are authorized to make the 
certification required for redemption.
    (f) Continued participation of households under investigation. Upon 
the written request of Federal, State, or local government agencies 
which have authority to investigate, and are investigating, suspected 
violations of Federal or State statutes concerning the enforcement of 
the Food Stamp Act or the regulations, the State agency may allow 
ineligible households to continue program participation. The State 
agency may allow the households to continue participation in the program 
until the earlier of (1) expiration of the period of 90 days after the 
request is received or any longer period which FCS, upon request of the 
State agency, may approve in a particular case, or (2) receipt of 
notification from the investigative agency that participation may be 
terminated or that the investigation has been completed. Regardless of 
any other provision of these regulations, FCS may not hold the State 
agency liable for the value of any coupons issued to households under 
this paragraph.

[Amdt. 136, 43 FR 43274, Sept. 22, 1978, as amended by Amdt. 257, 49 FR 
32538, Aug. 15, 1984; Amdt. 267, 51 FR 6514, Feb. 25, 1986; Amdt. 272, 
51 FR 12498, Apr. 11, 1986; Amdt. 288, 52 FR 11815, Apr. 13, 1987; Amdt. 
272, 52 FR 18198, May 14, 1987; Amdt. 356, 59 FR 29714, June 9, 1994; 
Amdt. 331, 59 FR 60062, Nov. 22, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 278.6  Disqualification of retail food stores and wholesale food concerns, and imposition of civil money penalties in lieu of disqualifications.

    (a) Authority to disqualify or subject to a civil money penalty. FCS 
may disqualify any authorized retail food store or authorized wholesale 
food concern from further participation in the program if the firm fails 
to comply with the Food Stamp Act or this part. Disqualification shall 
be for from 6 months to 5 years for the firm's first sanction; for from 
12 months to 10 years for a firm's second sanction; and disqualification 
shall be permanent for a firm's third sanction or a disqualification 
based on trafficking as defined in Sec. 271.2. Any firm which has been 
disqualified and which wishes to be reinstated at the end of the period 
of disqualification or at any later time shall file a new application 
under Sec. 278.1 of this part so that FCS may determine whether 
reauthorization is appropriate. The application may be filed no earlier 
than 10 days before the end of the period of disqualification. FCS may, 
in lieu of a disqualification, subject the firm to a civil money penalty 
of up to $10,000 for each violation if FCS determines that a 
disqualification would cause hardship to participating households. FCS 
may impose a civil money penalty of up to $20,000 for each violation in 
lieu of a permanent disqualification for trafficking, as defined in 
Sec. 271.2, in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 278.6(i) and 
Sec. 278.6(j).

[[Page 859]]

    (b) Charge letter--(1) General provisions. Any firm considered for 
disqualification or imposition of a civil money penalty under paragraph 
(a) of this section or a fine as specified under paragraph (l) or (m) of 
this section shall have full opportunity to submit to FCS information, 
explanation, or evidence concerning any instances of noncompliance 
before FCS makes a final administrative determination. The FCS regional 
office shall send the firm a letter of charges before making such 
determination. The letter shall specify the violations or actions which 
FCS believes constitute a basis for disqualification or imposition of a 
civil money penalty or fine. The letter shall specify the violations or 
actions which FCS believes constitute a basis for disqualification or 
imposition of a civil money penalty. The letter shall inform the firm 
that it may respond either orally or in writing to the charges contained 
in the letter within 10 days of receiving the letter. The firm's 
response shall set forth a statement of evidence, information, or 
explanation concerning the specified violations or acts. The firm shall 
make its response, if any, to the officer in charge of the FCS field 
office which has responsibility for the project area in which the firm 
is located.
    (2) Charge letter for trafficking. (i) The charge letter shall 
advise a firm being considered for permanent disqualification based on 
evidence of trafficking as defined in Sec. 271.2 that the firm must 
notify FCS if the firm desires FCS to consider the sanction of a civil 
money penalty in lieu of permanent disqualification.
    (ii) Firms that request consideration of a civil money penalty in 
lieu of a permanent disqualification for trafficking shall have the 
opportunity to submit to FCS information and evidence as specified in 
Sec. 278.6(i), that establishes the firm's eligibility for a civil money 
penalty in lieu of a permanent disqualification in accordance with the 
criteria included in Sec. 278.6(i). This information and evidence shall 
be submitted within 10 days, as specified in Sec. 278.6(b)(1).
    (iii) If a firm fails to request consideration for a civil money 
penalty in lieu of a permanent disqualification for trafficking and 
submit documentation and evidence of its eligibility within the 10 days 
specified in Sec. 278.6(b)(1), the firm shall not be eligible for such a 
penalty.
    (c) Review of evidence. The letter of charges, the response, and any 
other information available to FCS shall be reviewed and considered by 
the appropriate FCS regional office, which shall then issue the 
determination.
    (d) Basis for determination. The FCS regional office making a 
disqualification or penalty determination shall consider: (1) The nature 
and scope of the violations committed by personnel of the firm, (2) any 
prior action taken by FCS to warn the firm about the possibility that 
violations are occurring, and (3) any other evidence that shows the 
firm's intent to violate the regulations.
    (e) Penalties. FCS shall take action as follows against any firm 
determined to have violated the Act or regulations. For the purposes of 
assigning a period of disqualification, a warning letter shall not be 
considered to be a sanction. A civil money penalty and a 
disqualification shall be considered sanctions for such purposes. The 
FCS regional office shall:
    (1) Disqualify a firm permanently if:
    (i) Personnel of the firm have trafficked as defined in Sec. 271.2; 
or
    (ii) Violations such as, but not limited to, the sale of ineligible 
items occurred and the firm had twice before been sanctioned.
    (2) Disqualify the firm for 5 years if it is to be the firm's first 
sanction, the firm had been previously advised of the possibility that 
violations were occurring and of possible consequences of violating the 
regulations, and the evidence shows that:
    (i) It is the firm's practice to sell expensive or conspicuous 
nonfood items, cartons of cigarettes, or alcoholic beverages in exchange 
for food coupons; or
    (ii) The firm's coupon redemptions for a specified period of time 
exceed its food sales for the same period of time; or
    (iii) A wholesale food concern's redemptions of coupons for a 
specified period of time exceed the redemptions of all the specified 
authorized retail food stores, nonprofit cooperative food-

[[Page 860]]

purchasing ventures, group living arrangements, drug addict and 
alcoholic treatment programs, homeless meal providers, and shelters for 
battered women and children which the wholesale food concern was 
authorized to serve during that time; or
    (iv) A wholesale food concern's stated redemptions of coupons for a 
particular retail food store, nonprofit cooperative food-purchasing 
venture, group living arrangement, drug addict and alcoholic treatment 
program, homeless meal providers, or shelters for battered women and 
children exceeded the actual amount of coupons which that firm or 
organization redeemed through the wholesaler; or
    (v) Personnel of the firm knowingly accepted coupons from an 
unauthorized firm or an individual known not to be legally entitled to 
possess coupons.
    (3) Disqualify the firm for 3 years if it is to be the first 
sanction for the firm and the evidence shows that:
    (i) It is the firm's practice to commit violations such as the sale 
of common nonfood items in amounts normally found in a shopping basket 
and the firm was previously advised of the possibility that violations 
were occurring and of the possible consequences of violating the 
regulations; or
    (ii) Any of the situations described in paragraph (e)(2) of this 
section occurred and FCS had not previously advised the firm of the 
possibility that violations were occurring and of the possible 
consequences of violating the regulations; or
    (iii) The firm is an authorized communal dining facility, drug 
addiction or alcoholic treatment and rehabilitation program, group 
living arrangement, homeless meal provider, meal delivery service, or 
shelter for battered women and children and it is the firm's practice to 
sell meals in exchange for food coupons to persons not eligible to 
purchase meals with food coupons and the firm has been previously 
advised of the possibility that violations were occurring and of the 
possible consequences of violating the regulations; or
    (iv) A wholesale food concern accepted coupons from an authorized 
firm which it was not authorized to serve and the wholesale food concern 
had been previously advised of the possibility that violations were 
occurring and of possible consequences of violating the regulations; or
    (v) The firm is an authorized retail food store and personnel of the 
firm have engaged in food coupon transactions with other authorized 
retail stores, not including treatment programs, group living 
arrangements, homeless meal providers, or shelters for battered women 
and children, and the firm had been previously advised of the 
possibility that violations were occurring and of the possible 
consequences of violating the regulations.
    (4) Disqualify the firm for 1 year if it is to be the first sanction 
for the firm and the ownership or management personnel of the firm have 
committed violations such as the sale of common nonfood items in amounts 
normally found in a shopping basket, and FCS had not previously advised 
the firm of the possibility that violations were occurring and of the 
possible consequences of violating the regulations.
    (5) Disqualify the firm for 6 months if it is to be the first 
sanction for the firm and the evidence shows that personnel of the firm 
have committed violations such as but not limited to the sale of common 
nonfood items due to carelessness or poor supervision by the firm's 
ownership or management.
    (6) Double the appropriate period of disqualification prescribed in 
paragraphs (e) (2) through (5) of this section as warranted by the 
evidence of violations if the same firm has once before been assigned a 
sanction.
    (7) Send the firm a warning letter if violations are too limited to 
warrant a disqualification.
    (f) Criteria for civil money penalties for hardship and transfer of 
ownership. (1) FCS may impose a civil money penalty as a sanction in 
lieu of disqualification when the firm subject to a disqualification is 
selling a substantial variety of staple food items, and the firm's 
disqualification would cause hardship to food stamp households because 
there is no other authorized retail food store in the area selling as 
large a variety of staple food items at comparable prices. FCS may 
disqualify a store which meets the criteria for a civil money penalty if 
the store had previously

[[Page 861]]

been assigned a sanction. A civil money penalty for hardship to food 
stamp households may not be imposed in lieu of a permanent 
disqualification.
    (2) In the event any retail food store or wholesale food concern 
which has been disqualified is sold or the ownership thereof is 
otherwise transferred to a purchaser or transferee, the person or other 
legal entity who sells or otherwise transfers ownership of the retail 
food store or wholesale food concern shall be subjected to and liable 
for a civil money penalty in an amount to reflect that portion of the 
disqualification period that has not expired, to be calculated using the 
method found at Sec. 278.6(g). If the retail food store or wholesale 
food concern has been permanently disqualified, the civil money penalty 
shall be double the penalty for a ten year disqualification period. The 
disqualification shall continue in effect at the disqualified location 
for the person or other legal entity who transfers ownership of the 
retail food store or wholesale food concern notwithstanding the 
imposition of a civil money penalty under this paragraph.
    (3) At any time after a civil money penalty imposed under paragraph 
(f) (2) of this section has become final under the provisions of part 
279, the Food and Consumer Service may request the Attorney General 
institute a civil action to collect the penalty from the person or 
persons subject to the penalty in a district court of the United States 
for any district in which such person or persons are found, reside, or 
transact business.
    (4) A bona fide transferee of a retail food store shall not be 
required to pay a civil money penalty imposed on the firm prior to its 
transfer. A buyer or transferee (other than a bona fide buyer or 
transferee) may not be authorized to accept or redeem coupons and may 
not accept or redeem coupons until the Secretary receives full payment 
of any penalty imposed on such store or concern.
    (g) Amount of civil money penalties for hardship and transfer of 
ownership. FCS shall determine the amount of the civil money penalty as 
follows:
    (1) Determine the firm's average monthly redemptions of coupons for 
the 12-month period ending with the month immediately preceding that 
month during which the firm was charged with violations.
    (2) Multiply the average monthly redemption figure by 10 percent.
    (3) Multiply the product arrived at in paragraph (g)(2) by the 
number of months for which the firm would have been disqualified under 
paragraph (e) of this section. The civil money penalty may not exceed 
$10,000 for each violation.
    (h) Notifying the firm of civil money penalties for hardship and 
transfer of ownership. A firm has 15 days from the date the FCS regional 
office notifies the firm in writing in which to pay the civil money 
penalty, or to notify the regional office in writing of its intent to 
pay in installments as specified by the regional office. The firm must 
present to FCS a collateral bond as specified in Sec. 278.1(b)(4), 
within the same 15-day period. The civil money penalty must be paid in 
full by the end of the period for which the firm would have been 
disqualified. FCS shall:
    (1) Disqualify the firm for the period determined to be appropriate 
under paragraph (e) of this section if the firm refuses to pay any of 
the civil money penalty;
    (2) Disqualify the firm for a period corresponding to the unpaid 
part of the civil money penalty if the firm does not pay the civil money 
penalty in full or in installments as specified by the FCS regional 
office; or
    (3) Disqualify the firm for the prescribed period if the firm does 
not present a collateral bond within the required 15 days. Any payment 
on a civil money penalty which have been received by FCS shall be 
returned to the firm. If the firm presents the required bond during the 
disqualification period, the civil money penalty may be reinstated for 
the duration of the disqualification period.
    (i) Criteria for eligibility for a civil money penalty in lieu of 
permanent disqualification for trafficking. FCS may impose a civil money 
penalty in lieu of a permanent disqualification for trafficking as 
defined in Sec. 271.2 if the firm timely submits to FCS substantial 
evidence which demonstrates that the firm had established and 
implemented

[[Page 862]]

an effective compliance policy and program to prevent violations of the 
Program. Firms assessed a CMP under this paragraph shall be subject to 
the applicable penalties included in Secs. 278.6(e) (2) through (6) for 
the sale of ineligible items. Only those firms for which a permanent 
disqualification for trafficking took effect on or after October 1, 
1988, are eligible for a civil money penalty in lieu of permanent 
disqualification for trafficking, except that firms that have been 
disqualified but are awaiting a judicial review decision are eligible 
for a civil money penalty in lieu of a permanent disqualification. In 
determining the minimum standards of eligibility of a firm for a civil 
money penalty in lieu of a permanent disqualification for trafficking, 
the firm shall, at a minimum, establish by substantial evidence its 
fulfillment of each of the following criteria:

    Criterion 1. The firm shall have developed an effective compliance 
policy as specified in Sec. 278.6(i)(1); and
    Criterion 2. The firm shall establish that both its compliance 
policy and program were in operation at the location where the 
violation(s) occurred prior to the occurrence of violations cited in the 
charge letter sent to the firm; and
    Criterion 3. The firm had developed and instituted an effective 
personnel training program as specified in Sec. 278.6(i)(2); and
    Criterion 4. Neither firm ownership nor management were aware of, 
approved, benefitted from, or were in any way involved in the conduct or 
approval of trafficking violations. For purposes of this section, a 
person is considered to be part of firm management if that individual 
has substantial supervisory responsibilities with regard to directing 
the activities and work assignments of store employees. Such supervisory 
responsibilities shall include the authority to hire employees for the 
store or to terminate the employment of individuals working for the 
store.

    (1) Compliance policy standards. As specified in Criterion 1 above, 
in determining whether a firm has established an effective policy to 
prevent violations, FCS shall consider written and dated statements of 
firm policy which reflect a commitment to ensure that the firm is 
operated in a manner consistent with this part 278 of current FSP 
regulations and current FSP policy on the proper acceptance and handling 
of food coupons. As required by Criterion 2, such policy statements 
shall be considered only if documentation is supplied which establishes 
that the policy statements were provided to the violating employee(s) 
prior to the commission of the violation. In addition, in evaluating the 
effectiveness of the firm's policy and program to ensure FSP compliance 
and to prevent FSP violations, FCS may consider the following:
    (i) Documentation reflecting the development and/or operation of a 
policy to terminate the employment of any firm employee found violating 
FSP regulations;
    (ii) Documentation of the development and/or continued operation of 
firm policy and procedures resulting in appropriate corrective action 
following complaints of FSP violations or irregularities committed by 
firm personnel;
    (iii) Documentation of the development and/or continued operation of 
procedures for internal review of firm employees' compliance with FSP 
regulations;
    (iv) The nature and scope of the violations charged against the 
firm;
    (v) Any record of previous firm violations under the same ownership 
or management; and
    (vi) Any other information the firm may present to FCS for 
consideration.
    (2) Compliance training program standards. As prescribed in 
Criterion 3 above, the firm shall have developed and implemented an 
effective training program for all managers and employees on the 
acceptance and handling of food coupons in accordance with this part 
278. A firm which seeks a civil money penalty in lieu of a permanent 
disqualification shall document its training activity by submitting to 
FCS its dated training curricula and records of dates training sessions 
were conducted; a record of dates of employment of firm personnel; and 
contemporaneous documentation of the participation of the violating 
employee(s) in initial and any follow-up training held prior to the 
violation(s). FCS shall consider a training program effective if it 
meets or is otherwise equivalent to the following standards:
    (i) Training for all managers and employees whose work brings them 
into contact with food stamps or who are assigned to a location where 
food

[[Page 863]]

stamps are accepted, handled or processed shall be conducted within one 
month of the institution of the compliance policy under Criterion 1 
above. Employees hired subsequent to the institution of the compliance 
policy shall be trained within one month of employment. All employees 
shall be trained periodically thereafter;
    (ii) Training shall be designed to establish a level of competence 
that assures compliance with Program requirements as included in this 
part 278;
    (iii) Written materials, which may include FCS publications and 
program regulations that are available to all authorized firms, are used 
in the training program. Training materials shall clearly state that the 
following acts are prohibited and are in violation of the Food Stamp Act 
and regulations: the exchange of food coupons, ATP cards or other 
program access devices for cash; and, in exchange for coupons, the sale 
of firearms, ammunition, explosives or controlled substances, as the 
term is defined in section 802 of title 21, United States Code.
    (j) Amount of civil money penalty in lieu of permanent 
disqualification for trafficking. A civil money penalty assessed in 
accordance with Sec. 278.6(i) shall not exceed $20,000 for each 
violation and shall not exceed $40,000 for all violations occurring 
during a single investigation. FCS shall determine the amount of the 
civil money penalty as follows:
    (1) Determine the firm's average monthly redemptions for the 12-
month period ending with the month immediately preceding the month 
during which the firm was charged with violations;
    (2) Multiply the average monthly redemption figure by 10 percent;
    (3) For the first trafficking offense by a firm, multiply the 
product obtained in Sec. 278.6(j)(2) by 60 if the largest amount of food 
coupons, ATP cards, or other benefit instruments involved in a single 
trafficking transaction had a face value of $99 or less. If the face 
value of coupons, ATP cards or other benefit instruments involved in the 
largest single trafficking transaction was $100 or more, the amount of 
the product obtained in this paragraph shall be doubled;
    (4) For a second trafficking offense by a firm, multiply the product 
obtained in Sec. 278.6(j)(2) by 120 if the largest amount of food 
coupons, ATP cards, or other benefit instruments involved in a single 
trafficking transaction had a face value of $99 or less and the same 
firm has once before been sanctioned for trafficking in food coupons, 
ATP cards, or other benefit instruments. If the face value of food 
coupons, ATP cards, or other benefit instruments involved in the largest 
single trafficking transaction was $100 or more, the amount of the 
product obtained in this paragraph shall be doubled; and
    (5) If a third trafficking offense is committed by the firm, the 
firm shall not be eligible for a civil money penalty in lieu of 
disqualification.
    (k) Payment of civil money penalty in lieu of a permanent 
disqualification for trafficking. Payment of the full amount of the 
civil money penalty in lieu of permanent disqualification for 
trafficking shall be made within 30 days of the date the final 
determination was received by the firm. If payment is not made within 
the prescribed period, the right to the civil money penalty in lieu of a 
permanent disqualification is forfeited and disqualification shall 
become effective immediately.
    (l) Fines for the acceptance of loose coupons. FCS may impose a fine 
against any retail food store or wholesale food concern that accepts 
coupons that are not accompanied by the corresponding book cover, other 
than the denomination of coupons used for making change as specified in 
Sec. 278.2(d) or coupons accepted from homeless meal providers as 
specified in Sec. 278.2(c). The fine to be assessed against a firm found 
to be accepting loose coupons shall be $500 per investigation plus an 
amount equal to double the face value of each loose coupon accepted, and 
may be assessed and collected in addition to any fiscal claim 
established by FCS. The fine shall be paid in full within 30 days of the 
firm's receipt of FCS' notification to pay the fine. The Attorney 
General of the United States may institute judicial action in any court 
of competent jurisdiction against the store or concern to collect the 
fine. FCS may withdraw the authorization of the

[[Page 864]]

store, as well as other authorized locations of a multi-unit firm which 
are under the same ownership, for failure to pay such a fine as 
specified under Sec. 278.1(k). FCS may deny the authorization of any 
firm that has failed to pay such fines as specified under Sec. 278.1(j).
    (m) Fines for unauthorized third parties that accept food stamps. 
FCS may impose a fine against any individual, sole proprietorship, 
partnership, corporation or other legal entity not approved by FCS to 
accept and redeem food coupons for any violation of the provisions of 
the Food Stamp Act or the program regulations, including violations 
involving the acceptance of coupons. The fine shall be $1,000 for each 
violation plus an amount equal to three times the face value of the 
illegally accepted food coupons. The fine shall be paid in full within 
30 days of the individual's or legal entity's receipt of FCS' 
notification to pay the fine. The Attorney General of the United States 
may institute judicial action in any court of competent jurisdiction 
against the person to collect the fine. FCS may withdraw the 
authorization of any firm that is under the same ownership as an 
unauthorized firm that has failed to pay such a fine, as specified under 
Sec. 278.1(k). FCS may deny authorization to any firm that has failed to 
pay such a fine, as specified under Sec. 278.1(j).
    (n) Review of determination. The determination of the FCS regional 
office shall be final and not subject to further administrative or 
judicial review unless a written request for review is filed within the 
period stated in Sec. 279.5.
    (o) Delivery of notice. The delivery by certified mail or personal 
service of any notice required of FCS by this part will constitute 
notice to the addressee of its contents.

[Amdt. 136, 43 FR 43274, Sept. 22, 1978, as amended by Amdt. 236, 47 FR 
56471, Dec. 17, 1982; Amdt. 236, 49 FR 22057, May 25, 1984; Amdt. 258, 
49 FR 28393, July 12, 1984; Amdt. 286, 52 FR 7558, Mar. 11, 1987; Amdt. 
280, 52 FR 13222, Apr. 22, 1987; Amdt. 311, 54 FR 18645, May 2, 1989; 
Amdt. 323, 55 FR 31812, Aug. 6, 1990; Amdt. 344, 56 FR 54778, Oct. 23, 
1991; Amdt. 334, 57 FR 3912, Feb. 3, 1992; Amdt. 354, 59 FR 27434, May 
27, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 278.7  Determination and disposition of claims--retail food stores and wholesale food concerns.

    (a) Claims against violators. FCS may establish and pursue claims 
against firms or other entities which have accepted or redeemed coupons 
in violation of the Food Stamp Act or this part regardless of whether 
the firms or entities are authorized to accept food stamps. If a firm 
fails to pay a claim, FCS may collect the claim by offsetting against 
amounts due the firm on redemption of other coupons or by deducting the 
amounts due from bonds posted by firms in compliance with the provisions 
of Sec. 278.1(b)(4). FCS shall deny an application for authorization or 
reauthorization by a firm which has failed to pay a claim.
    (b) Forfeiture of a collateral bond. If FCS establishes a claim 
against an authorized firm which has previously been sanctioned, 
collection of the claim may be through total or partial forfeiture of 
the collateral bond. If FCS determines that forfeiture is required for 
collection of the claim, FCS shall take one or more of the following 
actions, as appropriate.
    (1) Determine the amount of the bond to be forfeited on the basis of 
the loss to the Government through violations of the act, and this part, 
as detailed in a letter of charges to the firm;
    (2) Send written notification by certified mail-return receipt 
requested to the firm and the bonding agent, of FCS' determination 
regarding forfeiture of all or a specified part of the collateral bond, 
and the reasons for the forfeiture;
    (3) Advise the firm and the bonding agent of the firm's right to 
administrative review of the claim determination;
    (4) Advise the firm and the bonding agent that if payment of the 
current claim is not received directly from the firm, FCS shall obtain 
full payment through forfeiture of the bond;
    (5) Proceed with collection on the bond for the amount forfeited if 
a request for review is not filed by the firm within the period 
established in Sec. 279.5, or if such review is unsuccessful; and
    (6) Upon the expiration of time permitted for the filing of a 
request for administratve and/or judicial review, deposit the bond in a 
Federal Reserve

[[Page 865]]

Bank account or in the Treasury Account, General. If FCS requires only a 
portion of the face value of the bond to satisfy a claim, the entire 
bond will be negotiated, and the remaining amount returned to the firm.
    (c) Coupons accepted without authorization. (1) The FCS officer in 
charge may approve the redemption under Sec. 278.4 of coupons accepted 
by firms before the receipt of an authorization card from FCS if the 
following conditions exist:
    (i) The coupons were received in accordance with the requirements of 
this part governing acceptance of coupons except the requirement that 
the firm be authorized before acceptance;
    (ii) The coupons were accepted by the firm in good faith, and 
without intent to circumvent this part; and
    (iii) The firm receives authorization to participate in the program.
    (2) Firms seeking approval to redeem coupons accepted without 
authorization shall present a written application for approval to the 
local FCS field office. This application shall be accompanied by a 
written statement signed by the firm of all the facts about the 
acceptance of the coupons. The statement shall also include a 
certification that the coupons were accepted in good faith, and without 
any intent to circumvent this part.
    (d) Burned or mutilated coupons. FCS may redeem burned or mutilated 
coupons only to the extent that the Bureau of Engraving and Printing of 
the United States Treasury Department can determine the value of the 
coupons. The firm presenting burned or mutilated coupons for redemption 
shall submit the coupons to the local FCS field office with a properly 
filled-out redemption certificate. In the section of the redemption 
certificate for entering the amount of coupons to be redeemed, an 
estimate of the value of the burned or mutilated coupons submitted for 
redemption shall be entered if the exact value of the coupons is 
unknown. The phrase ``Deputy Administrator for Fiscal Management, FCS, 
USDA,'' should be entered in the section of the redemption certificate 
for entering the name and address of the insured financial institution 
or wholesaler.
    (e) Old series coupons. FCS may redeem the old series food coupons 
issued in 50-cent, 2-dollar, and 5-dollar denominations when they are 
presented for redemption. Firms presenting the coupons for redemption 
shall submit the coupons to the local FCS field office with a properly 
completed redemption certificate and a written statement, signed by a 
representative of the firm, detailing the circumstances of the 
acceptance of the coupons.
    (f) Denials of claims brought by authorized firms against FCS. If a 
claim brought by a firm against FCS under this section is denied in 
whole or in part, notification of this action shall be sent to the firm 
by certified mail or personal service. If the firm is aggrieved by this 
action, it may seek administrative review as provided in Sec. 278.8.
    (g) Lost or stolen coupons. FCS may not be held liable for claims 
from retail food stores, meal services, or wholesale food concerns for 
lost or stolen coupons.

[Amdt. 136, 43 FR 43274, Sept. 22, 1978, as amended by Amdt. 258, 49 FR 
28393, July 12, 1984; Amdt. 257, 49 FR 32538, Aug. 15, 1984; Amdt. 262, 
49 FR 50598, Dec. 31, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 278.8  Administrative review--retail food stores and wholesale food concerns.

    (a) Requesting review. A food retailer or wholesaler aggrieved by 
administrative action under Sec. 278.1, Sec. 278.6 or Sec. 278.7 may, 
within the period stated in Sec. 279.5, file a written request for 
review of the administrative action with the review officer. On receipt 
of the request for review, the questioned administrative action shall be 
stayed pending disposition of the request for review by the review 
officer. A disqualification for failure to pay a civil money penalty 
shall not be subject to an administrative review.
    (b) Addressing the request. The request for review shall be filed 
with the Director, Administrative Review Division, U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Food and Consumer Service, Room 304, 3101 Park Center 
Drive, Alexandria, Virginia 22302.
    (c) Review procedure. The procedure for food stamp reviews in 
published in part 279 and is available upon request

[[Page 866]]

from the Director, Administrative Review Division.

[Amdt. 236, 49 FR 22058, May 25, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 278.9  Implementation of amendments relating to the participation of retail food stores, wholesale food concerns and insured financial institutions.

    (a) Amendment 224. Retail food stores shall have signs posted as 
required by this amendment no later than 30 days after distribution of 
the signs by FCS.
    (b) Amendment 257. With the exception of the provisions in 
Sec. 278.5 requiring redeeming financial institutions to verify that 
coupons are supported by redemption certificates, the revisions to part 
278 shall be effective September 14, 1984. Redeeming financial 
institutions shall begin verifying coupon deposits as required by 
Sec. 278.5 in accordance with the schedule determined by the Federal 
Reserve Board. Insured financial institutions shall adhere to 
preexisting requirements for handling redemption certificates (at 7 CFR 
278.5(a)) until their Federal Reserve District implements the procedures 
contained in this final rule. FCS shall not be liable for any losses of 
coupons in transit to Federal Reserve Banks or as a result of a burglary 
or robbery of an insured financial institution which occur after 
September 14, 1984.
    (c) Amendment 267. The federally insured credit unions authorized to 
redeem food stamps under this amendment may begin accepting food stamps 
for redemption not later than March 27, 1986.
    (d) The program changes of Amendment 272 at Sec. 278.5(a) (1) and 
(3) are effective upon publication of the amendment. Financial 
institutions must implement the provisions no later than April 21, 1986.
    (e) Amendment No. 286. The provisions for part 278 of Amendment No. 
286 were effective March 11, 1987 for purposes of submitting 
applications for authorization to accept food stamps. For all other 
purposes, the effective date was April 1, 1987.
    (f) Amendment No. 280. The provisions for part 271 and 
Secs. 278.1(r) and 278.6(f) of No. 280 are effective retroactively to 
April 1, 1987. The provision for Sec. 278.1(o) is effective May 22, 
1987.
    (g) Amendment No. 304. The technical amendment for part 278 of 
Amendment No. 304 was effective August 1, 1988.
    (h) Amendment No. 323. The program changes made to Sec. 278.6 by 
this amendment are retroactively effective October 1, 1988.
    (i) Amendment No. 334. The program changes made to Sec. 278.1 and 
Sec. 278.6 by this amendment are effective February 1, 1992. The program 
changes made to Sec. 271.2 and Sec. 271.5 by this amendment are 
retroactively effective to November 28, 1990, as specified in Pub. L. 
No. 101-624.
    (j) Amendment No. 354. The program changes made to Sec. 271.2 and 
Sec. 278.6 by this amendment are effective October 1, 1993.
    (k) Amendment No. 331. The program changes made to Secs. 271.2 and 
278.5 by this amendment are effective December 22, 1994.
    (l) Amendment No. 335. Expanded authority to use and disclose 
information about firms participating in the FSP under CFR 278.1(r) for 
currently authorized firms is effective and will be implemented 
beginning February 25, 1997 but not before 60-days after the date of 
notices to such firms, notifying them of the changes. The only exception 
to the above is that such disclosure of information shall not apply to 
firms that are withdrawn or are disqualified from FSP participation 
prior to implementation, unless such firms participate in the FSP at a 
future date subsequent to the implementation date.

[Amdt. 136, 43 FR 43274, Sept. 22, 1978]

    Editorial Note: For Federal Register citations affecting Sec. 278.9, 
see the List of CFR Sections Affected appearing in the Finding Aids 
section of this volume.

    Effective Date Note: At 61 FR 68122, Dec. 27, 1996, in Sec. 278.9, 
paragraph (l) was added, effective Feb. 25, 1997.
Sec. 278.10  [Reserved]


<R03>
PART 279--ADMINISTRATIVE AND JUDICIAL REVIEW--FOOD RETAILERS AND FOOD WHOLESALERS--Table of Contents

<R05>


                Subpart A--Administrative Review--General

Sec.
279.1  Scope and purpose.

[[Page 867]]

279.2  Administrative review officer.
279.3  Authority and jurisdiction.
279.4  Rules of procedure.

                      Subpart B--Rules of Procedure

279.5  Manner of filing requests for review.
279.6  Content of request for review.
279.7  Action upon receipt of a request for review.
279.8  Determination of the administrative review officer.
279.9  Legal advice and extensions of time.

                       Subpart C--Judicial Review

279.10  Judicial review.
279.11  Implementation of amendments relating to administrative and 
          judicial review.

    Authority: 7 U.S.C. 2011-2032.

    Source: Amdt. 136, 43 FR 43279, Sept. 22, 1978, unless otherwise 
noted.


<R04>
                Subpart A--Administrative Review--General


<R05>
Sec. 279.1  Scope and purpose.

    Subpart A sets forth the procedure for the designation of the 
administrative review officers and the authority and jurisdiction of 
those officers. Subpart B states the rules of procedure to be followed 
in the filing and disposition of the requests for review provided for in 
Sec. 278.8. Subpart C concerns the rights of food retailers and food 
wholesalers to judicial review of the final determinations of the 
administrative review officer.

[Amdt. 136, 43 FR 43279, Sept. 22, 1978, as amended by Amdt. 356, 59 FR 
29714, June 9, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 279.2  Administrative review officer.

    (a) Designation of review officers. The Administrator, FCS, shall 
designate one or more persons to act as administrative review officers.
    (b) Assigning cases to review officers. The officers shall serve for 
periods which the Administrator, FCS, shall determine. Changes in 
designations and additional designations may be made from time to time 
at the discretion of the Administrator, FCS. When more than one 
administrative review officer has been designated, requests for review 
will be assigned for handling to individual administrative review 
officers by a person designated by the Administrator, FCS. The names of 
the administrative review officers shall be on file in the Office of the 
Administrator, FCS.

[Amdt. 136, 43 FR 43279, Sept. 22, 1978, as amended by Amdt. 356, 59 FR 
29714, June 9, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 279.3  Authority and jurisdiction.

    (a) Jurisdiction. An administrative review officer shall act for the 
Department on requests for review filed by firms aggrieved by any of the 
following actions:
    (1) Denial of an application or withdrawal of authorization to 
participate in the program under Sec. 278.1;
    (2) Disqualification from participation in the program or imposition 
of a civil money penalty under Sec. 278.6 or imposition of a fine under 
Sec. 278.6(l) or Sec. 278.6(m);
    (3) Denial of all or part of any claim asserted by a firm against 
FCS under Sec. 278.7 (c), (d), or (e);
    (4) Assertion of a claim under Sec. 278.7(a); or
    (5) Forfeiture of part or all of a collateral bond under Sec. 278.1, 
if the request for review is made by the authorized firm. The 
administrative review officer shall not accept requests for review made 
by a bonding company or agent.
    (b) Authority. The determination of the administrative review 
officer shall be the final administrative determination of the 
Department, subject, however, to judicial review under section 14 of the 
Food Stamp Act and subpart C of this part.

[Amdt. 136, 43 FR 43279, Sept. 22, 1978, as amended by Amdt. 258, 49 FR 
28393, July 12, 1984; Amdt. 257, 49 FR 32538, Aug. 15, 1984; Amdt. 262, 
49 FR 50598, Dec. 31, 1984; Amdt. 334, 57 FR 3913, Feb. 3, 1992; Amdt. 
356, 59 FR 29714, June 9, 1994; Amdt. 364, 61 FR 54320, Oct. 17, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 279.4  Rules of procedure.

    Rules of procedure for the orderly filing and disposition of 
requests for review of firms submitted in accordance with Sec. 279.5 are 
issued in subpart B of this part. The Administrator, FCS, may later 
issue amendments to any rules of procedure which are appropriate.

[[Page 868]]


<R04>
                      Subpart B--Rules of Procedure


<R05>
Sec. 279.5  Manner of filing requests for review.

    (a) Addressing requests for review. Requests for review submitted by 
firms shall be mailed to or filed with Director, Administrative Review 
Division, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Consumer Service, 
Room 304, 3101 Park Center Drive, Alexandria, Virginia 22302.
    (b) Content of requests. Requests for review shall be in writing and 
shall state the name and business address of the firm involved, and the 
name, address and position with the firm of the person who signed the 
request. The request shall be signed by the owner of the firm, an 
officer or partner of the firm, or by counsel, and need not be under 
oath.
    (c) Time limit for requesting review. A request for review shall be 
filed with the Director, Administrative Review Division, within 10 days 
of the date of delivery of the notice of the action for which review is 
requested. For purposes of determining whether a filing date is timely:
    (1) The filing date shall be the postmark date of the request, or 
equivalent if the written request is filed by a means other than mail;
    (2) In computing the 10 day period, the day of delivery of the 
notice of the action for which review is requested may not be included. 
The last day of the period so computed shall be included, unless it is a 
Saturday, a Sunday, or a legal holiday. In that case, the period runs 
until the end of the next day which is not a Saturday, a Sunday, or a 
legal holiday. As used in this paragraph, ``legal holiday'' includes New 
Year's Day, Washington's Birthday, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor 
Day, Columbus Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, and 
any other day designated as a holiday by the President or the Congress 
of the United States.

[Amdt. 136, 43 FR 43279, Sept. 22, 1978, as amended by Amdt. 236, 49 FR 
22058, May 25, 1984]


<R05>
Sec. 279.6  Content of request for review.

    (a) Identifying the request. Requests for review shall clearly 
identify the administrative action from which the review is requested. 
This identification shall include the date of the letter or other 
written communication notifying the firm of the administrative action, 
the name and title of the person who signed the letter or other 
communication, and whether the action under appeal concerns a denial of 
an application or a withdrawal of authorization to participate, a 
disqualification from further participation, a civil money penalty, or a 
denial of all or any part of a claim or a fine.
    (b) Supporting the request. The request shall include information in 
support of the request showing the grounds on which review is being 
sought, or shall state that supporting information will be filed in 
writing at a later date. In the latter case, the review officer shall 
notify the firm of the date by which the information must be filed. The 
firm requesting review may ask for an opportunity to appear before the 
review officer in person. However, any information submitted in person 
shall, if directed by the review officer, be put in writing by the firm 
and filed with the review officer within a period which the review 
officer shall specify.

[Amdt. 136, 43 FR 43279, Sept. 22, 1978, as amended by Amdt. 236, 49 FR 
22058, May 25, 1984; Amdt. 334, 57 FR 3913, Feb. 3, 1992]


<R05>
Sec. 279.7  Action upon receipt of a request for review.

    (a) Holding action. Upon receipt of a request for review of 
administrative action, the review officer shall notify the appropriate 
FCS regional office, in writing, of the action under review, and shall 
direct that the administrative action be held in abeyance until the 
review officer has made a determination. If the administrative action in 
question involves a denial of approval of an application to participate 
in the program, a denial of a claim brought by a firm against FCS, or 
the forfeiture of a collateral bond, the review officer shall direct 
that the firm not be approved for participation, not be paid any part of 
the disputed claim, or not be reimbursed for any bond forfeiture, until 
the review officer has made a determination. In any case, notice to the 
appropriate FCS office shall

[[Page 869]]

be accompanied by a copy of the request filed by the firm.
    (b) Filing supporting information. If the request filed by the firm 
includes a request for an opportunity to file written information in 
support of its position at a later date, the administrative review 
officer shall promptly notify the firm of the date by which the 
information shall be filed. If the firm fails to file any information in 
support of its position by the designated date, the information 
submitted with the original request shall be considered to be the only 
information submitted by the firm. In that case, if no information in 
support of the firm's position was submitted with the original request, 
the action of the appropriate FCS office shall be final.
    (c) Failure to meet with review officer. If the firm filing the 
request for review asks to appear before the administrative review 
officer in person, the review officer shall promptly notify the firm of 
the date, time and place set for the appearance. If the firm fails to 
appear before the administrative review officer as specified, any 
written information timely submitted in accordance with this section 
shall be considered to be the only information submitted by the firm.
    (d) Basis for regional office determination. The administrative 
review officer shall require the appropriate FCS regional office to 
promptly submit, in writing, all information which was the basis for the 
administrative action for which the review has been requested.

[Amdt. 136, 43 FR 43279, Sept. 22, 1978, as amended by Amdt. 236, 49 FR 
22059, May 25, 1984; Amdt. 258, 49 FR 28393, July 12, 1984; 49 FR 29769, 
July 24, 1984; Amdt. 356, 59 FR 29714, June 9, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 279.8  Determination of the administrative review officer.

    (a) Basis for review officer determination. The administrative 
review officer shall make a determination based upon:
    (1) The information submitted by the appropriate FCS office;
    (2) Information submitted by the firm in support of its position; 
and
    (3) Any additional information, in writing, obtained by the review 
officer from any other person having relevant information.
    (b) Review of denial of application or withdrawal of approval. In 
the case of a request for review of a denial of an application or 
withdrawal of approval to participate in the program, the determination 
of the administrative review officer shall sustain the action under 
review or shall direct that the firm be approved for participation.
    (c) Review of disqualification or civil money penalty or fine. In 
the case of a request for review of action disqualifying a firm from 
participation in the program or assessing a civil money penalty or fine 
against the firm, the determination of the administrative review officer 
shall sustain the action under review or specify a shorter period of 
disqualification or a reduced civil money penalty or fine, direct that 
an official warning letter be issued to the firm in lieu of any period 
of disqualification or civil money penalty or fine, or direct that no 
administrative action be taken. The administrative review officer may 
change a disqualification of a firm selling a substantial variety of 
staple foods to a civil money penalty if the review officer receives 
information that the disqualification would cause a hardship to 
participating households because there are no other firms in the area 
selling as large a variety of staple food items at comparable prices, 
and this information was not available to the appropriate FCS office 
when the appropriate FCS office made its determination to disqualify the 
firm. In such a case, the administrative review officer, before he/she 
makes a determination, shall provide the information to the appropriate 
FCS office, which shall report to the administrative review officer 
whether the new information warrants a civil money penalty in lieu of 
disqualification. If the administrative review officer determines that a 
civil money penalty in lieu of a disqualification is warranted, the 
review officer shall determine the amount of the penalty in accordance 
with Sec. 278.6.
    (d) Review of denial of claim. In the case of a request for review 
of a denial of all or part of a claim of a firm, the determination of 
the administrative review officer shall sustain the action

[[Page 870]]

under review or shall specify the amount of the claim to be paid by FCS.
    (e) Notice of review officer determination. The administrative 
review officer shall notify the firm of the determination by certified 
mail. The notification shall be sent to the representative of the firm 
who filed the request for review.
    (f) Notifying the appropriate FCS office. The administrative review 
officer shall send a copy of the notification to the firm to the 
appropriate FCS office, which shall take any action which may be 
necessary to comply with the determination of the review officer.
    (g) Effective date. The determination of the administrative review 
officer shall take effect 30 days after the date of delivery of the 
determination to the firm.

[Amdt. 136, 43 FR 43279, Sept. 22, 1978, as amended by Amdt. 334, 57 FR 
3913, Feb. 3, 1992; Amdt. 356, 59 FR 29714, June 9, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 279.9  Legal advice and extensions of time.

    (a) Advice from Office of the General Counsel. If any request for 
review involves any doubtful questions of law, the administrative review 
officer shall obtain the advice of the Department's Office of the 
General Counsel.
    (b) Extensions of time. Upon timely written request to the 
administrative review officer by the firm requesting the review, the 
administrative review officer may grant extensions of time if, in the 
review officer's discretion, additional time is required for the firm to 
fully present information in support of its position. However, no 
extensions may be made in the time allowed for the filing of a request 
for review.

[Amdt. 136, 43 FR 43279, Sept. 22, 1978, as amended by Amdt. 356, 59 FR 
29714, June 9, 1994]


<R04>
                       Subpart C--Judicial Review


<R05>
Sec. 279.10  Judicial review.

    (a) Filing for judicial review. A firm aggrieved by the 
determination of the administrative review officer may obtain judicial 
review of the determination by filing a complaint against the United 
States in the U.S. district court for the district in which the owner 
resides or is engaged in business, or in any court of record of the 
State having competent jurisdiction. The complaint must be filed within 
30 days after the date of delivery or service upon the firm of the 
notice of determination of the administrative review officer in 
accordance with Sec. 279.8(e); otherwise the determination shall be 
final.
    (b) Summons and complaint. Service of the summons and complaint in 
any such action shall be made in accordance with the rules of civil 
procedure for the U.S. district courts. The copy of the summons and 
complaint required by the rules to be served on the officer or agency 
whose order is being attacked shall be sent by registered or certified 
mail to the person in charge of the applicable regional office of FCS.
    (c) Trial de novo. The suit in the U.S. district court or in the 
State court, as the case may be, shall be a trial de novo by the court 
in which the court shall determine the validity of the questioned 
administrative action. If the court determines that the administrative 
action is invalid, it shall enter a judgment or order which it 
determines is in accordance with the law and the evidence.
    (d) Stay of action. During the pendency of any judicial review, or 
any appeal therefrom, the administrative action under review shall 
remain in force unless the firm makes a timely application to the court 
and after hearing thereon, the court stays the administrative action 
after a showing that irreparable injury will occur absent a stay and 
that the firm is likely to prevail on the merits of the case.

[Amdt. 136, 43 FR 43279, Sept. 22, 1978, as amended by Amdt. 274, 51 FR 
18752, May 21, 1986; Amdt. 356, 59 FR 29714, June 9, 1994]


<R05>
Sec. 279.11  Implementation of amendments relating to administrative and judicial review.

    (a) Amendment No. 257. The program change to Sec. 279.3(a)(4) shall 
be effective September 14, 1984.
    (b) Amendment No. 274. The program change of Amendment No. 274 at 
Sec. 279.10(d) is effective retroactively to December 23, 1985.
    (c) Amendment No. 334. The program changes made to part 279 by this

[[Page 871]]

amendment are effective February 1, 1992.

[Amdt. 257, 49 FR 32539, Aug. 15, 1984; Amdt. 262, 49 FR 50598, Dec. 31, 
1984, as amended by Amdt. 274, 51 FR 18752, May 21, 1986; Amdt. 334, 57 
FR 3913, Feb. 3, 1992]


<R03>
PART 280--EMERGENCY FOOD ASSISTANCE FOR VICTIMS OF DISASTERS--Table of Contents

<R05>


    Authority: 7 U.S.C. 2011-2032.

    Source: Amdt. 192, 46 FR 8922, Jan. 27, 1981, as amended at 56 FR 
63617, Dec. 4, 1991.

    Editorial Note: OMB control numbers relating to this part 280 are 
contained in Sec. 271.8.


<R05>
Sec. 280.1  Interim disaster procedures.

    The Secretary shall, after consultation with the official empowered 
to exercise the authority provided for by section 302(a) of the Disaster 
Relief Act of 1974, establish temporary emergency standards of 
eligibility for the duration of the emergency for households who are 
victims of a disaster which disrupts commercial channels of food 
distribution, if such households are in need of temporary food 
assistance and if commercial channels of food distribution have again 
become available to meet the temporary food needs of such households. 
Such standards as are prescribed for individual emergencies may be 
promulgated without regard to section 4(c) of this Act or the procedures 
set forth in section 553 of Title 5 of the United States Code. In 
addition to establishing temporary emergency standards of eligibility, 
the Secretary shall provide for emergency allotments to eligible 
households to replace food destroyed in a disaster. Such emergency 
allotments would be equal to the value of the food actually lost in such 
disaster but not greater than the applicable maximum monthly allotment 
for the household size.


<R03>
PART 281--ADMINISTRATION OF THE FOOD STAMP PROGRAM ON INDIAN RESERVATIONS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
281.1  General purpose and scope.
281.2  Administration.
281.3  Determination of failure.
281.4  Determining Indian tribal organization capability.
281.5  Responsibilities of an Indian tribal organization designated as 
          State agency.
281.6  Liabilities and sanctions.
281.7  Indian tribal organization failure.
281.8  Transfer of program administration.
281.9  Funding.
281.10  Appeals.

    Authority: 7 U.S.C. 2011-2032.

    Source: 44 FR 35925, June 19, 1979, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 281.1  General purpose and scope.

    (a) These regulations govern the operation of the Food Stamp Program 
on Indian reservations either separately or concurrently with the Food 
distribution program. In order to assure that the Food Stamp Program is 
responsive to the needs of Indians on reservations, State agencies are 
required to consult with Indian tribal organizations about the 
implementation and operation of the Food Stamp Program on reservations. 
Also, under certain specified conditions Indian tribal organizations on 
reservations can administer the Food Stamp Program. The Act authorizes 
the Secretary to pay such amounts for administrative costs as are 
determined to be necessary for the effective operation of the Food Stamp 
Program on Indian reservations.
    (b) The operation of the Food Stamp Program on Indian reservations 
is governed by all of the terms and conditions set forth in the Food 
Stamp Act of 1977 as amended and the regulations of this chapter.
    (c) Additionally, under no circumstances shall any household 
participate simultaneously in the Food Stamp Program and the Food 
Distribution Program. Policy governing this prohibition is found in 
Sec. 283.7(e).


<R05>
Sec. 281.2  Administration.

    (a) Qualification. (1) The appropriate ITO of an established Indian 
reservation will qualify for participation under the provisions of this 
part, when that ITO files an application which demonstrates the status 
of an area as an established reservation, unless FCS determines that 
such area(s) does not qualify as a reservation, as that term is defined 
in these regulations. For purposes of this part, established reservation 
means the geographically defined

[[Page 872]]

area(s) currently recognized and established by Federal or State treaty 
or by Federal statute whereby such geographically defined area(s) is set 
aside for the use of Indians. Where such established areas exist, the 
appropriate ITO is presumed to exercise governmental jurisdiction, 
unless otherwise determined by FCS:
    (2) The appropriate ITO for other areas, in order to qualify as 
reservations for the provisions of this part, must show to FCS:
    (i) That the ITO exercises governmental jurisdiction over a 
geographic area(s) which enjoys legal recognition from the Federal or a 
State government and is set aside for the use of Indians.
    (ii) A clear and precise description of the boundaries of such 
geographic area(s).
    (3) Otherwise qualified areas for which the responsible ITO has 
requested operation of the Food Distribution Program alone in accordance 
with Sec. 283.4, rather than concurrent operation with the Food Stamp 
Program, shall be exempt from the requirements of this part, and shall 
not be considered food stamp areas for any other purposes of this 
subchapter. Indian tribal households (households in which at least one 
adult member is recognized by the appropriate ITO as a tribal member) 
resident in these areas shall be ineligible for food stamp benefits. 
However, non-Indian tribal households resident in these areas may apply 
and be certified for food stamps at the State agency's certification 
office which would otherwise service the area. Otherwise qualified areas 
for which the responsible ITO has requested operation of the food 
distribution Program concurrently with the Food Stamp Program or areas 
within the reservation where FCS has determined that concurrent 
operation is necessary in accordance with Sec. 283.3(b)(2) shall be 
subject to all requirements of this part and subchapter.
    (b) State plan. In addition to the public comment requirements in 
Sec. 272.2, the State agency shall submit for comment its service plans, 
and all other portions of the State plan that directly pertains to the 
operation of the Program for residents on the reservation to the 
responsible ITO for reservations that qualify under paragraph (a) of 
this section. The ITO shall have 30 days to provide comments in writing 
to the State agency. The State agency shall, if appropriate and to the 
extent practicable, incorporate into its plans any suggestions made by 
the ITO. Additionally, the State agency shall administer the Food Stamp 
Program in a manner that is responsive to the needs of the Indians on 
the reservation, as determined by ongoing consultation with the ITO and 
by other means, regarding such areas of program operation as project 
area designation, operating procedures, locations and hours of 
certification and issuance, staffing and corrective action plans. The 
State agency shall maintain records of consultations on State plans and 
ongoing consultations held with ITO's for review by FCS. FCS shall study 
these records as part of reviews in accord with Sec. 281.3 and 
Management Evaluation Reviews of the State agency.
    (c) Project area designation. (1) An Indian reservation shall be 
designated as a separate project area or areas for the purpose of 
improving the accessibility of program services to Indians on the 
reservation unless:
    (i) The State agency demonstrates to FCS that the size or population 
of the reservation does not warrant such designation;
    (ii) The State agency demonstrates to FCS that the tribe can be 
adequately served by the existing or a planned project area because of 
the location of certification and issuance offices;
    (iii) The State agency demonstrates to FCS that such designation 
would reduce the availability of certification and issuance offices; or
    (iv) The State agency otherwise demonstrates to FCS that such 
designation would impair its Statewide administration of the Program.
    (2) In the case where the Indian reservation boundaries cross State 
lines, the ITO and the appropriate State agencies may jointly request 
FCS approval that a single State agency administer the Food Stamp 
Program on all or part of the Indian reservation. A single agency of the 
State government would have to administer the Program

[[Page 873]]

under the same terms and conditions applied to all other political 
subdivisions within its jurisdiction. An ITO designated as a State 
agency pursuant to Sec. 281.4(d) would have to administer the Program 
under the same terms and conditions on all areas of the reservation.
    (d) Contracts with an Indian tribal organization. The State agency 
may contract program functions to an ITO. These functions include, but 
are not limited to, outreach, preparation of bilingual materials on 
issuance. The State agency may also use the ITO in prescreening, 
translations, interpretive services and other noncertification 
functions. The State agency shall not contract responsibility for 
certification activities such as interviews or eligibility 
determinations. In all cases, the State agency shall retain full 
responsibility for program administration.

[44 FR 35925, June 19, 1979, as amended by Amdt. 207, 47 FR 52338, Nov. 
19, 1982]


<R05>
Sec. 281.3  Determination of failure.

    (a) Request for determination of State government agency failure. 
FCS shall examine State agency adminstration of the Food Stamp Program 
on all or part of a reservation when requested by the ITO, the State 
agency or at FCS' discretion. When FCS determines that a deficiency in a 
State agency operation of the Food Stamp Program on all or part of an 
Indian reservation may be serious enough to warrant a review, FCS shall 
advise the State agency and the ITO in writing of the alleged 
deficiencies and of its plans to conduct the review and document 
deficiencies, if any are found. Subsequent to October 1, 1979 FCS shall 
complete these reviews within 90 days from receipt of an ITO's or State 
agency's request except under unusual circumstances such as the receipt 
of a large number of simultaneous requests.
    (b) Review--(1) Content of the review for State agency performance. 
The review shall be designed to determine whether or not the State 
agency is properly administering the Food Stamp Program on a specific 
reservation. When an agency of State government is administering the 
Program on a reservation, FCS shall as a part of the review consult with 
the ITO about the operation of the Program on the reservation. The 
review should, depending on the nature of the complaint, include but not 
be limited to, an analysis of some or all of the following data:
    (i) The records of State agency consultation with the ITO required 
under Sec. 281.2(a);
    (ii) The estimated percentage of all eligible Indians on the 
reservation who are participating the Program;
    (iii) The nature and extent of violations, if any, of the 30-day and 
other processing standards for Indians;
    (iv) The percentage of errors made in determining eligibility and/or 
the amount of benefits overissued or underissued;
    (v) Compliance with standards for location and hours of 
certification and issuance offices as required in Sec. 272.5;
    (vi) Compliance with bilingual requirements of this regulation, 
where appropriate;
    (vii) Compliance with nondiscrimination requirements of this 
regulation;
    (viii) Compliance with other significant program requirements;
    (ix) Comparison with services provided in all other areas of the 
State; and
    (x) Any other relevant information that becomes available during the 
course of reviews including information received through contacts with 
the Indian tribe.
    (2) Finding of no or of minor deficiencies. If after the review FCS 
determines either that deficiencies do not exist or that only minor 
deficiencies exist, FCS shall issue a report documenting its findings to 
both the State agency and the ITO and shall work closely with the State 
agency to achieve corrective action.
    (c) Formal warning. After the review is completed, if FCS determines 
that major deficiencies exist, a formal warning shall be issued to the 
State, with a copy to the ITO. At a minimum, such warning shall indicate 
the State agency deficiencies and shall detail the basis upon which 
deficiencies were determined. The State shall have 30 days to respond 
with evidence that it is in compliance or to submit a corrective action 
proposal under part 276. If satisfactory compliance is achieved by the

[[Page 874]]

State agency on deficiencies cited in a formal warning, FCS shall notify 
the State, with a copy to the ITO, that the warning for those 
deficiences is satisfied.
    (d) Determination of failure and sanctions. If at any time after the 
formal warning period, or during or after the corrective action period, 
FCS determines that major deficiencies still exist which the State 
agency has not satisfactorily addressed or is not satisfactorily 
addressing, FCS shall determine State failure and may impose appropriate 
Federal sanctions on the State agency as specified in part 276.
    (e) ITO operations. If FCS has determined State failure and FCS has 
also determined that the ITO is capable of administering a Food Stamp 
Program in accordance with the terms and requirements for participating 
State agencies as established in the Act and regulations, then the ITO 
shall assume adminstration of the Food Stamp Program on the reservation. 
The State agency shall continue to administer the Food Stamp Program on 
the reservation until an effective termination and transition 
arrangement has been completed in accordance with Sec. 281.8.


<R05>
Sec. 281.4  Determining Indian tribal organization capability.

    (a) Determining capability of ITO. If the ITO wishes to administer 
its own Food Stamp Program on the reservation FCS shall determine the 
ITO's potential capability for administering the Food Stamp Program in 
accordance with the criteria listed in Sec. 281.4(b). FCS shall begin to 
evaluate the ITO's capability for all aspects of Food Stamp Program 
administration, allowing for fulfillment of that potential through 
necessary training and technical assistance, not later than the date of 
the issuance of the formal warning to the State agency.
    (b) ITO responsibility. (1) The ITO must satisfy FCS that it is 
capable (if provided with any needed training and technical assistance) 
of administering the Food Stamp Program effectively and efficiently, and 
of complying with all provisions of the Food Stamp Act of 1977, as 
amended, and the regulations of this chapter, including provisions 
governing quality control procedures, fraud determinations, and 
establishment and collection of claims for both Indian and any non-
Indian participants. The ITO shall provide FCS with the following 
information:
    (i) Operation of government programs. The ITO shall provide FCS a 
list of all government programs that the ITO administers and has 
recently administered. FCS may ask the ITO to provide the names of 
appropriate officials of the government organizations having 
jurisdiction over these programs so FCS can obtain all relevant audits, 
GAO reports, program evaluations and any other documents pertaining to 
the effectiveness and efficiency of tribal administration of these 
programs. The ITO shall also provide FCS a list of its recent 
contractual responsibilities, if any, for the Food Stamp Program under 
Sec. 281.2(b).
    (ii) Fiscal capabilities. The ITO shall provide FCS documentation of 
its bookeeping and accounting procedures, including procedures in use 
for fiscal accountability under part 277 and for other government 
programs that the ITO administers.
    (iii) Projected certification and issuance facilities. The ITO shall 
provide FCS with a description of the location of projected 
certification and issuance facilities.
    (iv) Fraud hearings and claims. The ITO shall provide FCS with a 
description of how it will pursue fraud hearings and claims against 
Indian and non-Indian participants.
    (v) Staffing. The ITO shall provide FCS with sufficient information 
to determine that personnel who will be used in the certification 
process will be employed under standards equivalent to current standards 
for a Merit System of Personnel Administration or any standards later 
prescribed by the Office of Personnel Management under section 208 of 
the Intergovernmental Personnel Act of 1970.
    (vi) Civil rights assurance. The ITO shall provide FCS an assurance 
that the ITO shall comply with Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 
(Pub. L. 88-352), the Age Discrimination Act of 1975 (Pub. L. 94-135), 
the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Pub. L. 99-112), section 504), and 
section 11(c) of the Food Stamp Act of

[[Page 875]]

1977 and all pertinent regulations or directives to the effect that no 
person in the United States shall, on the grounds of sex, race, color, 
age, political belief, religion, handicap, or national origin, be denied 
benefits or otherwise be subject to discrimination under the Food Stamp 
Program. Where appropriate, FCS shall consider the adequacy of measures 
taken by the ITO to ensure that there shall be no discrimination.
    (2) Prior to the determination of ITO capability, FCS shall consult 
with other sources such as the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) to obtain 
any information relevant to the capability determination.
    (3) If it is determined by FCS, after consultation with other 
sources such as the BIA, that the ITO is not capable of operating an 
efficient and effective Food Stamp Program, the agency of the State 
government shall continue to operate the Program on the reservation in 
accordance with Sec. 281.3.
    (c) Training and technical assistance. Upon determining that the 
State agency has failed to properly administer the Food Stamp Program 
and that the ITO is potentially capable of operating an effective and 
efficient Food Stamp Program, FCS shall determine, based on information 
provided by the ITO and other sources such as BIA, the training and 
technical assistance which is necessary to assure efficient and 
effective program administration. FCS will assure that appropriate 
training and technical assistance is provided as expeditiously as 
possible prior to the ITO's assumption of the administration of the Food 
Stamp Program.
    (d) Assumption of duties. When FCS is satisfied that the ITO has 
successfully completed (c) of this section, FCS shall designate the ITO 
as a State agency, contingent on the following:
    (1) State plans. The ITO shall prepare and submit to FCS a Plan of 
Operation as provided in Sec. 272.2. In completing the Plan of Operation 
the ITO shall affirm that it will comply with the Civil Rights 
assurances detailed in (b)(1)(vi) of this section.
    (2) Proposed budget. As part of the Plan of Operation, the ITO shall 
annually submit to FCS a proposed statement which shall provide a 
summary of program information and amounts budgeted to carry out the 
various program functions. This information shall be submitted to FCS 
for approval prior to the commitment of any Federal funds for 
administrative costs for that year. FCS shall provide the ITO any 
technical assistance which is necessary to prepare this information.
    (3) Termination and transition arrangement. An effective termination 
and transition arrangement shall be established as required in 
Sec. 281.8.


<R05>
Sec. 281.5  Responsibilities of an Indian tribal organization designated as State agency.

    An ITO administering the Food Stamp Program on a reservation shall 
adhere to the Food Stamp Act of 1977, all subsequent amendments, and all 
regulations issued pursuant to that law in the same manner as any other 
State agency. The ITO may contract certain administrative functions to 
private organizations as provided in parts 274 and 277. The ITO may not, 
however, contract responsibility for certification activities such as 
interviews or eligibility determinations. The ITO shall retain full 
responsibility for program administration.


<R05>
Sec. 281.6  Liabilities and sanctions.

    An ITO administering the Food Stamp Program on a reservation is 
subject to the same liabilities and Federal sanctions as is any other 
State agency. FCS shall monitor administration of the Program and 
conduct reviews through the Performance Reporting System described in 
part 275. When necessary, warning procedures and other Federal sanctions 
prescribed in part 276 will be implemented.


<R05>
Sec. 281.7  Indian tribal organization failure.

    When Performance Reporting System reviews indicate that continuing 
deficiencies exist and corrective action proposals (including training 
and technical assistance to overcome these deficiencies), and/or 
appropriate sanctions have not, in the opinion of FCS, resulted in a 
sufficient degree of improvement, FCS will conduct a review to determine 
if the ITO has failed to properly administer the Food Stamp

[[Page 876]]

Program. FCS shall examine the relevant factors specified in 
Sec. 281.3(b)(1) and shall follow the notification and determination 
procedures set forth in Sec. 281.3 (c) and (d). If ITO failure is 
determined, FCS shall require the appropriate agency of the State 
government to resume administration of the Program on the reservation in 
accordance with an approved termination and transition arrangement.


<R05>
Sec. 281.8  Transfer of program administration.

    The transfer of program administration from an agency of the State 
government to an ITO pursuant to a determination of failure as provided 
for in Sec. 281.3, or from an ITO to an agency of the State government 
pursuant to Sec. 281.7, shall be contingent on the establishment of an 
effective termination and transition arrangement and an approved Plan of 
Operation from the State agency assuming program administration. Grant 
closeout procedures shall be followed in accordance with part 277. FCS 
shall approve the transition plan, monitor its implementation and 
resolve any issues which may arise during the transition and after the 
transfer of program administration.


<R05>
Sec. 281.9  Funding.

    (a) Agency of State government. From the funds available to carry 
out this provision beginning July 1, 1979, FCS may pay to each agency of 
State government administering a Food Stamp Program on a reservation, 75 
percent of all approved administrative costs, such as: Certification, 
issuance, outreach, fair hearings and quality control, incurred on the 
reservation for residents of the reservation and approved by FCS to meet 
standards set by the 1977 Food Stamp Act. FCS may pay each agency of 
State government administering a Food Stamp Program on a reservation 75 
percent of all approved administrative costs incurred off the 
reservation for activities begun after the effective date of these 
regulations that are primarily directed at providing better services for 
Indians on the reservation, such as hiring an interpreter or an Indian 
outreach worker, or moving a certification or issuance center closer to 
a reservation. The provisions of part 277 apply to any funds received 
under this section.
    (b) Indian tribal organization acting as State agency. From the 
funds available to carry out the provisions of this part beginning 
October 1, 1979, FCS is authorized to pay to each ITO acting as a State 
agency and administering a Food Stamp Program on a reservation 75 
percent of all administrative costs approved by FCS as needed for 
operation of a Food Stamp Program on a reservation. Any approval for 
payment of funds in excess of 75 percent must be based on compelling 
justification that such additional amounts are necessary for the 
effective operation of the Food Stamp Program on the reservation. The 
provisions of part 277 apply to any funds received under this section.


<R05>
Sec. 281.10  Appeals.

    (a) Failure/capability. (1) Any State agency or ITO may appeal the 
determination made by FCS on:
    (i) Whether or not the reservation definition is met;
    (ii) The failure or absence of failure of an agency of State 
government to properly administer the Food Stamp Program;
    (iii) The capability or incapability of an ITO to administer the 
Food Stamp Program;
    (iv) The failure of an ITO to properly administer the Food Stamp 
Program;
    (v) The Federal matching percentage level of administrative funding 
made available by FCS. To prevail the State agency must show a 
compelling justification that additional funding is needed for the 
effective administration of the Program on the reservation.
    (2) At the time FCS advises the State agency or ITO of its 
determination, FCS shall also advise the State agency or ITO of its 
right to appeal and, except for appeals of funding determinations, shall 
advise the State agency or ITO of its right to request either a meeting 
to present its position in person or a review of the record. On appeals 
of funding determinations, FCS shall advise the State agency or ITO that 
it may indicate if it wishes a meeting, however, FCS need schedule a 
meeting only if FCS determines a meeting is warranted to reach a proper

[[Page 877]]

adjudication of the matter. Otherwise, FCS shall review supportive 
information submitted by the State agency or ITO in paragraph (b)(2) of 
this section.
    (b) Procedures--(1) Time limit. Any State agency or ITO which wants 
to appeal an initial FCS determination under paragraph (a) of this 
section must notify the Administrator of FCS, in writing within 15 days 
from the date of the determination and must advise FCS if it wishes a 
meeting or a review of the record.
    (2) Acknowledgment. Within five days of receipt by the Administrator 
of FCS of a request for review, FCS shall provide the State agency or 
ITO by certified mail, return receipt requested, with a written 
acknowledgement of the request. The acknowledgment shall include the 
name and address of the official designated by the Administrator to 
review the appeal. The acknowledgment shall also notify the State agency 
or ITO that within ten day of receipt of the acknowledgment, the State 
agency or ITO shall submit written information in support of its 
position.
    (3) Scheduling a meeting. If the Administrator, FCS, grants a 
meeting FCS shall advise the State agency or ITO by certified mail, 
return receipt requested, of the time, date and location of the meeting 
at least ten days in advance of the meeting. FCS shall schedule and 
conduct the meeting and make a decision within 60 days of the receipt of 
the information submitted in response to paragraph (b)(2) of this 
section.
    (4) Review. If no meeting is conducted, the official designated by 
the Administrator, FCS, shall review information presented by a State 
agency or ITO which requests a review, and shall make a final 
determination in writing within 45 days of the receipt of the State 
agency's or ITO's information submitted in response to paragraph (b)(2) 
of this section setting forth in full the reasons for the determination.
    (5) Final decision. The official's decision after a meeting or a 
review shall be final.
    (c) Funding and other sanctions. Any State agency or ITO that wishes 
to appeal a funding determination made by FCS other than under (a)(5) of 
this section, or the application of a Federal sanction, shall follow the 
Administrative Review Procedures set forth in part 276.


<R03>
PART 282--DEMONSTRATION, RESEARCH, AND EVALUATION PROJECTS--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
282.1  Legislative authority and notice requirements.
282.2  Funding.

    Authority: 7 U.S.C. 2011-2032.

    Source: Amdt. 134, 43 FR 54215, Nov. 21, 1978, unless otherwise 
noted.


<R05>
Sec. 282.1  Legislative authority and notice requirements.

    (a) Legislative authority. Section 17 of the Act authorizes the 
Secretary to conduct demonstration, research, and evaluation projects. 
In conducting such projects, the Secretary may waive all or part of the 
requirements of the Act and implementing regulations necessary to 
conduct such projects, except that no project, other than a project 
involving the payment of the average value of allotments by household 
size in the form of cash to eligible households or a project conducted 
to test improved consistency or coordination between the food stamp 
employment and training program and the Job Opportunities and Basic 
Skills program under Title IV of the Social Security Act, may be 
undertaken which would lower or further restrict the established income 
and resource standards or benefit levels.
    (b) Notices. At least 30 days prior to the initiation of a 
demonstration project, FCS shall publish a General Notice in the Federal 
Register if the demonstration project will likely have a significant 
impact on the public. The notice shall set forth the specific 
operational procedures and shall explain the basis and purpose of the 
demonstration project. If significant comments are received in response 
to this General Notice, the Department will take such action as may be 
appropriate prior to implementing the project. If the operational 
procedures contained in the General Notice described above are 
significantly changed because of comments, an amended General Notice

[[Page 878]]

will be published in the Federal Register at least 30 days prior to the 
initiation of the demonstration project, except where good cause exists 
supporting a shorter effective date. The explanation for the 
determination of good cause will be published with the amended General 
Notice. The amended General Notice will also explain the basis and 
purpose of the change.

[Amdt. 371, 61 FR 60012, Nov. 26, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 282.2  Funding.

    Federal financial participation may be made available to 
demonstration, research, and evaluation projects awarded by FCS through 
grants and contracts. Funds may not be transferred from one project to 
another. FCS will pay all costs incurred during the project, up to the 
level established in the grant, or in the terms and conditions of the 
contract. FCS may grant time extensions of the project upon approval. 
Funding for additional costs is subject to existing Federal grant and 
contract procedures.

[Amdt. 371, 61 FR 60012, Nov. 26, 1996]


<R03>
PART 283--APPEALS OF QUALITY CONTROL (``QC'') CLAIMS--Table of Contents

<R05>


                           Subpart A--General

Sec.
283.1  Meaning of words.
283.2  Scope and applicability.
283.3  Definitions.

           Subpart B--Appeals of QC Claims of $50,000 or More

283.4  Filing appeals for QC claims of $50,000 or more.
283.5  Motion to dismiss.
283.6  Answer.
283.7  Procedures upon failure to file an answer.
283.8  Rebuttal or amendment of appeal or answer.
283.9  Withdrawal of appeal.
283.10  Consent decision.
283.11  Prehearing conference and procedure.
283.12  Discovery.
283.13  Subpoenas.
283.14  Fees of witnesses.
283.15  Procedure for hearing.
283.16  Consolidation of issues.
283.17  Post-hearing procedure.
283.18  Motions and requests.
283.19  ALJs.
283.20  Review by the Judicial Officer.
283.21  Ex parte communications.
283.22  Form; filing; service; proof of service; computation of time; 
          and extensions of time.
283.23  Procedural matters.

   Subpart C--Summary Procedure for Appeals of QC Claims of Less Than 
                                 $50,000

283.24  Incorporation of procedures by reference.
283.25  Filing appeals for QC claims of less than $50,000.
283.26  Request that appeals be handled under procedures in subpart B 
          for appeals of QC claims of $50,000 or more.
283.27  Procedures upon failure to file an answer.
283.28  Discovery.
283.29  Scheduling conference.
283.30  Cross motions for summary judgment.
283.31  Review of the record.
283.32  ALJ's initial decision.

    Authority: 7 U.S.C. 2011-2032.

    Source: Amdt. 348, 59 FR 34561, July 6, 1994, unless otherwise 
noted.


<R04>
                           Subpart A--General


<R05>
Sec. 283.1  Meaning of words.

    As used in this part, words in the singular form shall be deemed to 
import the plural, and vice versa, as the case may require.


<R05>
Sec. 283.2  Scope and applicability.

    The rules of practice in this part, shall be applicable to appeals 
by State agencies of Food and Consumer Service quality control (QC) 
claims for Fiscal Year (``FY'') 1986 and subsequent fiscal years 
pursuant to sections 14(a) and 16(c) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977, as 
amended, 7 U.S.C. 2023(a) and 2025(c).


<R05>
Sec. 283.3  Definitions.

    As used in this part, the terms as defined in the Food Stamp Act of 
1977, as amended, 7 U.S.C. 2011-2032 (``Act''), and in the regulations, 
standards, instructions or orders issued thereunder, shall apply with 
equal force and effect. In addition, and except as may be provided 
otherwise in this section:
    Administrator means the Administrator, Food and Consumer Service, 
U.S. Department of Agriculture (``USDA'').
    ALJ means any Administrative Law Judge in USDA appointed pursuant to 
5

[[Page 879]]

U.S.C. 3105 or detailed to the USDA pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 3344 and 
assigned to the appeal.
    Appeal means the appeal to the ALJ.
    Ex parte communication means an oral or written communication not on 
the public record with respect to which reasonable prior notice to all 
parties is not given, but it shall not include procedural matters.
    Filing. A pleading or other document allowed or required to be filed 
in accordance with this part shall be considered filed when postmarked, 
if mailed, or when received, if hand delivered.
    FCS means the Food and Consumer Service, USDA.
    Hearing means that part of the appeal which involves the submission 
of evidence before the ALJ for the record in the appeal.
    Hearing Clerk means the Hearing Clerk, USDA, Washington, DC 20250.
    Judicial Officer means an official of the USDA delegated authority 
by the Secretary of Agriculture, pursuant to the Act of April 4, 1940 (7 
U.S.C. 450c-459g) and Reorganization Plan No. 2 of 1953 (5 U.S.C. 1970 
ed., Appendix, P. 550), as amended by Public Law 97-35, title I, sec. 
125, 95 Stat. 357, 369 (1981) (7 U.S.C. 2201 note), to perform the 
adjudicating function involved (7 CFR 2.35(a)), or the Secretary of 
Agriculture if the authority so delegated is exercised by the Secretary.
    OC claim means a claim made pursuant to 7 U.S.C. 2025(c).
    Secretary means the Secretary of the USDA.
    State agency means:
    (1) The agency of State government, including the local offices 
thereof, which is responsible for the administration of the federally 
aided public assistance programs within the State, and in those States 
where such assistance programs are operated on a decentralized basis, it 
includes the counterpart local agencies which administer such assistance 
programs for the State agency; and
    (2) The Indian tribal organization of any Indian tribe determined by 
the Secretary to be capable of effectively administering a Food Stamp 
Program in accordance with the Food Stamp Act of 1977, as amended, 7 
U.S.C. 2011-2032.


<R04>
           Subpart B--Appeals of QC Claims of $50,000 or More


<R05>
Sec. 283.4  Filing appeals for QC claims of $50,000 or more.

    (a) Time. A State agency may appeal the bill for collection from FCS 
for a QC claim of $50,000 or more for a food stamp QC error rate in 
excess of the tolerance level. A State agency shall file a written 
notice of appeal, in accordance with this subpart, within 10 days of 
receipt of the bill for collection from FCS for a QC claim of $50,000 or 
more. The State agency may request an extension to the 10-day filing 
requirement in accordance with Sec. 283.22(f). FCS shall issue the bill 
for collection by certified mail or personal service.
    (b) Exhaustion of administrative remedies. The State agency must 
appeal the bill for collection to the ALJ, pursuant to this subpart, and 
exhaust the available administrative remedies before filing suit in the 
Federal District Courts.
    (c) Filing. The notice of appeal shall be filed with the Hearing 
Clerk in accordance with Sec. 283.22(b).
    (d) Content of the notice. (1) A notice of appeal, in order to be 
considered acceptable, must contain the following information:
    (i) A brief and clear statement that it is an appeal from a QC claim 
of $50,000 or more identifying the period the claim covers, the date and 
amount of the bill for collection, and the date of receipt of the bill 
for collection;
    (ii) Identification of the State agency as the appellant and FCS as 
the appellee;
    (iii) A statement that the notice of appeal is filed pursuant to 
section 14(a) of the Food Stamp Act;
    (iv) A copy of the bill for collection which constitutes the basis 
for the filing of the notice of appeal shall be attached to the notice.
    (2) Failure to file an acceptable notice of appeal may result in a 
challenge by FCS to the notice, dismissal of the notice by the ALJ and a 
waiver of the opportunity for further appeal or review by the Judicial 
Officer unless the State agency pursues the options as discussed in 
Secs. 283.17(d) and 283.20.

[[Page 880]]

    (e) Receipt of notice of appeal and assignment of docket number. 
Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the Hearing Clerk shall assign the 
appeal a docket number. The Hearing Clerk shall:
    (1) Send the State agency a letter which shall include the following 
information:
    (i) Advice that the notice of appeal has been received and the date 
of receipt;
    (ii) The docket number assigned to the appeal and instructions that 
all future communications related to the appeal shall reference the 
docket number, and;
    (iii) Advice that the State agency must file and serve its appeal 
petition, as set forth in Sec. 283.22, not later than 60 days after 
receiving a notice of the claim. Failure to file a timely appeal 
petition may result in a waiver of further appeal rights.
    (2) Send FCS a copy of the notice of appeal and a copy of the letter 
to the State agency.
    (f) Stay of collection. The filing of a timely notice of appeal 
shall automatically stay the action of FCS to collect the QC claim 
asserted against the State agency until a decision is reached on the 
acceptability of the appeal, and in the case of an acceptable appeal, 
until a final administrative determination has been issued. However, 
interest will accrue on the outstanding claim amount during the stay as 
provided in section 13(a)(1) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977, as amended 
(7 U.S.C. 2022(a)(1)).
    (g) Content of the appeal petition. The appeal petition shall 
include:
    (1) A brief statement of the allegations of fact and provisions of 
law that constitute the basis for the appeal including a statement as to 
whether a factual basis for good cause relief exists;
    (2) The nature of the relief sought, and;
    (3) A request for an oral hearing, if desired by the State agency. 
Failure to request an oral hearing will result in a forfeiture of the 
opportunity for such a hearing, except as provided in Sec. 283.15(a).
    (h) FCS answer. Upon service of the State agency appeal petition, 
FCS shall:
    (1) File an answer, in accordance with Sec. 283.6, not later than 60 
days after the State agency submits its appeal petition and;
    (2) Advise the Hearing Clerk if FCS wishes to have an oral hearing.
    (i) Oral hearing not requested. If no oral hearing has been 
requested, the appeal shall proceed in accordance with the procedures 
set forth under subpart C of this part.


<R05>
Sec. 283.5  Motion to dismiss.

    (a) Filing of motion to dismiss. Prior to or at the same time as 
filing the answer, FCS may file a motion to dismiss. The appeal may be 
challenged on the basis that the notice of appeal was not filed within 
10 days or as that time may have been extended by the ALJ, the appeal 
petition was not filed in accordance with Sec. 283.4, or that the appeal 
petition is substantially incomplete and could not be quickly and easily 
cured by amendment. The motion must be accompanied by clear and 
convincing proof of any of these factors alleged as grounds for 
dismissal.
    (b) Service of motion to dismiss. FCS shall serve the State agency 
with a copy of the motion to dismiss. The State agency will have 10 days 
from date of service to submit objections to the motion.
    (c) Ruling on a motion to dismiss. The ALJ will rule on the motion 
to dismiss before any further action proceeds on the basis of the merits 
of the appeal. The basis of the ruling will be clearly documented and 
will become part of the official record. If the ALJ denies the motion, 
FCS shall file its answer in accordance with Sec. 283.6 within 60 days 
of service of the ALJ's ruling, unless there is a motion for 
reconsideration filed pursuant to Sec. 283.17(d) or review by the 
Judicial Officer is sought pursuant to Sec. 283.20.
    (d) Dismissal of appeal. If the ALJ finds the basis for the motion 
to have merit, the appeal may be dismissed. The initial decision of the 
ALJ shall become final and effective 30 days after service in accordance 
with Sec. 283.17(c)(2) unless either party pursues the options as 
discussed in Secs. 283.17(d) and 283.20.
    (e) Waiver. Failure to file for dismissal of the appeal by the time 
the answer is required to be filed will result

[[Page 881]]

in waiver of the right to request dismissal.


<R05>
Sec. 283.6  Answer.

    (a) Filing and service. Not later than 60 days after the State 
agency submits its appeal petition, or within 60 days following service 
of a ruling in accordance with Sec. 283.5, FCS shall file an answer 
signed by the FCS Administrator or authorized representative or the 
attorney of record in the appeal. The attorney may file an appearance of 
record prior to or simultaneously with the filing of the answer.
    (b) Contents. The answer shall clearly admit, deny, or explain each 
of the allegations of the appeal petition and shall:
    (1) Clearly set forth any defense asserted by FCS; or
    (2) State that FCS admits all the facts alleged in the appeal 
petition; or
    (3) State that FCS admits the jurisdictional allegations of the 
appeal petition and neither admits nor denies the remaining allegations 
and consents to the issuance of an order without further procedure.
    (c) Default. Failure to file a timely answer shall be deemed, for 
purposes of the appeal, an admission of the allegations in the appeal 
petition and failure to deny or otherwise respond to an allegation of 
the appeal petition shall be deemed for purposes of the appeal, an 
admission of said allegation, unless FCS and the State agency have 
agreed to a consent decision pursuant to Sec. 283.10.


<R05>
Sec. 283.7  Procedures upon failure to file an answer.

    The failure by FCS to file an answer shall constitute a waiver of 
hearing. Upon such failure to file, the State agency shall file a 
proposed decision, along with a motion for adoption thereof, both of 
which shall be served upon FCS by the State agency. Within 10 days after 
service of such motion and proposed decision, FCS may file objections 
thereto. If the ALJ finds that meritorious objections have been filed, 
the State agency's motion shall be denied with supporting reasons. If 
meritorious objections are not filed, the ALJ shall issue an initial 
decision without further procedures or hearing. Copies of the initial 
decision or denial of the State agency's motion shall be served on each 
of the parties and shall be included as part of the official record. 
Where the decision as proposed by the State agency is adopted as the 
ALJ's initial decision, such decision of the ALJ shall become final and 
effective 30 days after service in accordance with Sec. 283.17(c)(2) 
unless reconsideration or review by the Judicial Officer is sought as 
discussed in Secs. 283.17(d) and 283.20.


<R05>
Sec. 283.8  Rebuttal or amendment of appeal or answer.

    (a) Not later than 30 days after FCS submits an answer in accordance 
with Sec. 283.6, the State agency may submit rebuttal evidence.
    (b) At any time prior to the filing of a motion for a hearing 
pursuant to Sec. 283.15(b), the appeal petition or the answer may be 
amended without prior authorization by the ALJ. Thereafter, such an 
amendment may only be made as authorized by the ALJ upon a showing of 
cause.


<R05>
Sec. 283.9  Withdrawal of appeal.

    At any time before the ALJ files an initial decision, the State 
agency may withdraw its appeal and agree to pay the full amount of the 
claim. By withdrawing an appeal, the State agency waives all opportunity 
to appeal or seek further administrative or judicial review on the claim 
or related matters.


<R05>
Sec. 283.10  Consent decision.

    At any time before the ALJ files an initial decision, FCS and the 
State agency may agree to entry of a consent decision. Such decision 
shall be filed in the form of a decision signed by the parties with 
appropriate space for signature by the ALJ and shall contain an 
admission of at least the jurisdictional facts, consent to the issuance 
of the agreed decision without further procedure and such other 
admissions or statements as may be agreed between the parties. The ALJ 
shall enter such decision without further procedures, unless an error is 
apparent on the face of the document. Such decision shall be final and 
shall take effect 30 days after the date of the delivery or service of

[[Page 882]]

such decision and is not subject to further administrative or judicial.


<R05>
Sec. 283.11  Prehearing conference and procedure.

    (a) Time and place. The ALJ shall direct the parties or their 
counsel to participate in a prehearing conference at any reasonable time 
prior to the hearing. The prehearing conference shall be held at the 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, DC. Reasonable notice of the 
time, place of the prehearing conference and if personal attendance will 
be necessary shall be given. Prehearing conferences may be conducted 
telephonically. The ALJ shall order each of the parties to furnish at 
the prehearing conference or at another time prior to the hearing the 
following:
    (1) An outline of the appeal or defense;
    (2) The legal theories upon which the party will rely;
    (3) Copies of or a list of documents that the party anticipates 
relying upon at the hearing; and
    (4) A list of witnesses who will testify on behalf of the party. At 
the discretion of the party furnishing such list of witnesses, the names 
of the witnesses need not be furnished if they are otherwise identified 
in some meaningful way, such as a short statement of the type of 
evidence they will offer.
    (b) Procedures. The ALJ shall not order any of the foregoing 
procedures that a party can show are inappropriate or unwarranted under 
the circumstances of the particular appeal.
    (c) Matters to be considered. At the prehearing conference, the 
following matters shall be considered:
    (1) The simplification of issues;
    (2) The necessity of amendments to pleadings;
    (3) The possibility of obtaining stipulations of facts and of the 
authenticity, accuracy, and admissibility of documents, which will avoid 
unnecessary proof;
    (4) The limitation of the number of expert or other witnesses;
    (5) Negotiation, compromise, or settlement of issues;
    (6) The exchange of copies of proposed exhibits;
    (7) The nature of and the date by which discovery, as provided in 
Sec. 283.12, must be completed;
    (8) The identification of documents or matters of which official 
notice may be requested;
    (9) A schedule to be followed by the parties for the completion of 
the actions decided at the conference; and
    (10) Such other matters as may expedite and aid in the disposition 
of the appeal.
    (d) Reporting. (1) A prehearing conference will not be 
stenographically reported unless so directed by the ALJ.
    (2) Any party to the appeal may, upon motion, request the ALJ to 
allow for a stenographic transcript of a prehearing conference. The 
party requesting the transcript shall bear the transcription cost of 
producing the transcript and the duplication cost for one transcript 
provided to the ALJ and to the other parties to the appeal.
    (e) Order. Actions taken as a result of a conference shall be 
reduced to an appropriate written order, unless the ALJ concludes that a 
stenographic report, if available, shall suffice, or, in the event the 
conference takes place within 7 days of the beginning of the hearing, 
the ALJ elects to make a statement on the record at the hearing 
summarizing the actions taken.


<R05>
Sec. 283.12  Discovery.

    (a) Dispositions.--(1) Motion for taking deposition. Only upon a 
finding by the ALJ that a deposition is necessary to preserve testimony 
as provided in this subparagraph, upon the motion of a party to the 
appeal, the ALJ may, at any time after the filing of the answer, order 
the taking of testimony by deposition. The motion shall set forth:
    (i) The name and address of the proposed deponent;
    (ii) The name and address of the person (referred to hereafter in 
this section as the ``officer'') qualified under the regulations in this 
part to take depositions, before whom the proposed examination is to be 
made;
    (iii) The proposed time and place of the examination, which shall be 
at least 15 days after the date of service of the motion; and
    (iv) The reasons why such deposition should be taken, which shall be 
solely

[[Page 883]]

for the purpose of eliciting testimony which otherwise might not be 
available at the time of the hearing, for use as provided in accordance 
with paragraph (a)(7) of this section.
    (2) ALJ's order for taking depositions. If the ALJ finds that the 
testimony may not otherwise be available at the hearing, the taking of 
the deposition may be ordered. The order shall be served upon the 
parties, and shall state:
    (i) The time and place of the examination;
    (ii) The name of the officer before whom the examination is to be 
made; and
    (iii) The name of the deponent. The officer and the time and place 
need not be the same as those suggested in the motion.
    (3) Qualifications of officer. The deposition shall be made before 
an officer authorized by the law of the United States or by the law of 
the place of the examination to administer oaths, or before an officer 
authorized by the Secretary to administer oaths.
    (4) Procedure on examination. (i) The deponent shall be examined 
under oath or affirmation and shall be subject to cross-examination. 
Objections to questions or documents shall be in the short form, stating 
the grounds of objections relied upon. The questions propounded, 
together with all objections made (but not including argument or 
debate), shall be recorded verbatim. In lieu of oral examination, 
parties may transmit written questions to the officer prior to the 
examination and the officer shall propound such questions to the 
deponent.
    (ii) The party taking the deposition shall arrange for the 
examination of the witness either by oral examination, or by written 
questions upon agreement of the parties or as directed by the ALJ. If 
the examination is conducted by means of written questions, copies of 
the questions shall be served upon the other party to the appeal and 
filed with the officer at least 10 days prior to the date set for the 
examination unless otherwise agreed, and the other party may serve cross 
questions and file them with the officer at any time prior to the time 
of the examination.
    (iii) The parties may stipulate in writing or the ALJ may upon 
motion order that a deposition be taken by telephone. A deposition taken 
by telephone is to be taken at the place where the deponent is to answer 
questions propounded to the deponent.
    (iv) The parties may stipulate in writing or the ALJ may upon motion 
order that a deposition be recorded by other than stenographic means. 
The stipulation or the order shall designate the manner of recording, 
preserving and filing of the deposition, and may include other 
provisions to assure that the recorded testimony is accurate and 
trustworthy.
    (5) Certification by the officer. The officer shall certify on the 
deposition that the deponent was duly sworn and that the deposition is a 
true record of the deponent's testimony. The officer shall then securely 
seal the deposition, together with one copy thereof (unless there are 
more than two parties in the appeal, in which case there should be 
another copy for each additional party), in an envelope and mail the 
same by registered or certified mail to the Hearing Clerk.
    (6) Corrections to the transcript. (i) At any time prior to the 
hearing, any party may file a motion proposing corrections to the 
transcript of the deposition.
    (ii) Unless a party files such a motion in the manner prescribed, 
the transcript shall be presumed to be a true, correct, and complete 
transcript of the testimony given in the deposition proceeding and to 
contain an accurate description or reference to all exhibits in 
connection therewith, and shall be deemed to be certified correct 
without further procedure.
    (iii) At any time prior to the use of the deposition in accordance 
with paragraph (a)(7) of this section and after consideration of any 
objections filed thereto, the ALJ may issue an order making any 
corrections in the transcript which the ALJ finds are warranted, and 
these corrections shall be entered onto the original transcript by the 
Hearing Clerk (without obscuring the original text).
    (7) Use of depositions. A deposition ordered and taken in accordance 
with the provisions of this section may be used

[[Page 884]]

in an appeal under these rules if the ALJ finds that the evidence is 
otherwise admissible and
    (i) That the witness is deceased;
    (ii) That the witness is unable to attend or testify because of age, 
sickness, infirmity, or imprisonment;
    (iii) That the party offering the deposition has endeavored to 
procure the attendance of the witness by subpoena, but has been unable 
to do so; or
    (iv) That such exceptional circumstances exist as to make it 
desirable, in the interests of justice, to allow the deposition to be 
used. If the party upon whose motion the deposition was taken refuses to 
offer it in evidence, any other party may offer the deposition or any 
part thereof in evidence. If only part of a deposition is offered in 
evidence by a party, any other party may require the introduction of any 
other part which is relevant be considered with the part introduced, and 
any party may introduce any other parts.
    (b) Interrogatories, requests for admissions and requests for 
production of documents--(1) Interrogatories. A party may submit written 
interrogatories to any other party to an appeal. The time for submitting 
and responding to written interrogatories shall be set by the ALJ at the 
pre-hearing conference, but in no event shall the time for response be 
less than 20 days from the date of service or within such time as 
determined upon motion to the ALJ. The number of interrogatories 
submitted by each party shall not exceed twenty-five questions including 
subparts, unless additional interrogatories are authorized by the ALJ. 
Each interrogatory should be answered separately and fully in writing, 
unless it is objected to, in which event the reasons for objection 
should be stated in lieu of an answer. The answers are to be signed 
under penalty of perjury by the person making them. Objections shall be 
signed by the attorney of record in the appeal or by the responding 
party's authorized representative.
    (2) Request for admissions. A party may submit a written request for 
admission of the truth of any matters relevant to the appeal to any 
other party to the appeal. The time for submitting a written request for 
admission shall be set by the ALJ at the pre-hearing conference. The 
number of admissions contained in a request submitted by a party shall 
not exceed twenty-five unless additional admissions are authorized by 
the ALJ. The matter is admitted unless, within 20 days after service 
thereof, or within such time as determined upon motion to the ALJ, the 
party to whom the request is directed serves upon the party requesting 
the admission a written answer or objection addressed to the matter 
signed by the party, counsel or designated representative. If objection 
is made, the reasons therefor should be stated. The answer should 
specifically deny the matter or set forth in detail why the answering 
party cannot truthfully admit or deny the matter. An answering party may 
not give lack of information or knowledge as a reason for the failure to 
admit or deny unless it is stated that reasonable inquiry has been made 
and that the information known or readily obtainable is insufficient to 
enable the party to admit or deny. A party who considers that a matter 
for which an admission has been requested presents a genuine issue for 
hearing may not, on that ground alone, object to the request; the party 
may deny the matter or set forth reasons why the matter cannot be 
admitted or denied.
    (3) Request for production of documents. (i) Any party may serve 
upon any other party to the appeal a request for production of documents 
which are in the possession or control of the party upon whom the 
request is served. The time for service and response to such a request 
shall be set by the ALJ at the pre-hearing conference. Upon payment of 
fees for search and duplication of documents, any party to the appeal 
may obtain copies of such documents.
    (ii) Parties may request production of any documents regarding any 
matter, not privileged, which is relevant to the subject matter involved 
in the pending action. Grounds for objection will not exist if the 
information sought appears reasonably calculated to lead to the 
discovery of admissible evidence.
    (iii) If such documents include privileged information or 
information the disclosure of which is proscribed by the

[[Page 885]]

Food Stamp Act of 1977, as amended, such documents need not be produced.
    (c) Supplementation of response. A party who knows or later learns 
that a response is incorrect is under a duty to correct such response as 
soon as possible. A party who has responded to a request for discovery 
with a response that was complete when made is under a duty to 
supplement the response to include information thereafter acquired. A 
party is under a duty to supplement responses with respect to any 
question directly addressed to:
    (1) The identity and location of persons having knowledge of 
discoverable matters, and
    (2) The identity of each person expected to be called as an expert 
witness at the hearing, the subject matter on which such expert(s) is 
expected to testify, and the substance of the testimony.
    (d) Frequency and use of discovery. The ALJ shall limit, upon motion 
of a party, the frequency or extent of discovery if the ALJ determines 
that:
    (1) The discovery sought is unreasonably cumulative or duplicative, 
or is obtainable from some other source that is more convenient, less 
burdensome, or less expensive;
    (2) The party seeking discovery has had ample opportunity by 
discovery in the action to obtain the information sought; or
    (3) The discovery is unduly burdensome or expensive, taking into 
account the needs of the case, the amount in controversy, limitations on 
the parties' resources, and the importance of the issues at stake in the 
litigation.
    (e) Protective orders--(1) Request for protective order. A party 
served with such a request may file a motion for a protective order 
before the date on which a response to the discovery request is due, 
stating why discovery should be limited or should not be required.
    (2) Issuance of protective order. In issuing a protective order, the 
ALJ may make any order which justice requires to protect a party or 
person from annoyance, embarrassment, oppression or undue burden or 
expense, including one or more of the following:
    (i) That discovery not be had;
    (ii) That the discovery may be had only through a method of 
discovery other than that requested;
    (iii) That certain matters not be inquired into, or that the scope 
of discovery be limited to certain matters;
    (iv) That discovery be conducted with no one present except persons 
designated by the ALJ; and
    (v) That the contents of discovery or evidence be sealed.
    (f) Failure to respond to discovery--(1) Motions to compel. If a 
deponent fails to respond or gives an evasive or incomplete answer to a 
question propounded at a deposition pursuant to paragraph (a) of this 
section or a party fails to respond or gives evasive or incomplete 
answers to written interrogatories or admissions, or fails to respond, 
in full or in part, to a request for production of documents served 
pursuant to paragraph (b) of this section, the party seeking discovery 
may apply for an order compelling an answer by filing and serving a 
motion on all parties and deponents.
    (2) Filing motion to compel. (i) Such motion must be filed within 20 
days following the service of the unresponsive answer upon deposition or 
within 20 days after expiration of the period allowed for answers to 
interrogatories or production of documents.
    (ii) On matters related to an oral examination, the proponent of the 
question may complete or adjourn the examination before he applies for 
an order.
    (3) Responding to motion to compel. A response to the motion may be 
filed in accordance with Sec. 283.18(d).
    (g) Decision of the ALJ. (1) The ALJ may grant a motion to compel 
production or deny a motion for a protective order only if the ALJ finds 
that the discovery sought is necessary for the expeditious, fair, and 
reasonable consideration of the issues; it is not unduly costly or 
burdensome; it will not unduly delay the proceeding; and the information 
sought is not privileged.
    (2) The initial decision of the ALJ regarding the motion to compel 
the production of privileged documents or the motion for a protective 
order shall become final and effective 10 days after service unless 
either party pursues the

[[Page 886]]

options as discussed in Secs. 283.17(d) and 283.20.
    (h) Failure to comply with an order. (1) If a party or other witness 
refuses to be sworn or refuses to answer any question after being 
directed to do so by order of the ALJ, such refusal may subject the 
refusing party to proceedings to compel compliance with the ALJ's order 
in the appropriate United States district court.
    (2) If any party or other person refuses to obey an order made under 
this section requiring an answer to designated questions or production 
of documents, the ALJ may order that the matters regarding which 
questions were asked or the contents of the document or documents or any 
other designated facts should be taken to be established for the 
purposes of the proceeding in accordance with the claim of the party 
obtaining the order.
    (i) Postponements or delays. No hearing, proceeding or other matter 
under this part shall be postponed or otherwise delayed pending the 
response or resolution of issues pertaining to a request for information 
pursuant to the Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. 552.


<R05>
Sec. 283.13  Subpoenas.

    (a) Issuance of subpoenas. The attendance and testimony of witnesses 
and the production of documentary evidence from any place in the United 
States on behalf of any party to the appeal may be required by subpoena 
at the designated place of hearing. Except for cause shown, requests for 
subpoenas shall be filed at least 15 days prior to the date of the 
hearing. Subpoenas shall be issued by the ALJ, over the facsimile 
signature of the Secretary, upon a reasonable showing by the applicant 
of the grounds, necessity and reasonable scope thereof.
    (b) Service of subpoenas. (1) When the ALJ issues a subpoena under 
this section, the party who requested such subpoena shall serve all 
other parties with a copy of the subpoena, notice of the names and 
addresses of the individuals subpoenaed and specify any documents 
required to be produced.
    (2) Subpoenas may be served:
    (i) By a U.S. Marshal or deputy marshal,
    (ii) By any other person who is not less than 18 years of age, or
    (iii) By registering and mailing a copy of the subpoena addressed to 
the person to be served at the last known principal place of business or 
residence.
    (3) Proof of service may be made:
    (i) By the return of service on the subpoena by the U.S. Marshal or 
deputy marshal,
    (ii) If served by an employee of the Department, by a certificate 
stating that he personally served the subpoena upon the person named 
therein,
    (iii) If served by another person, by an affidavit of such person 
stating that he personally served the subpoena upon the person named 
therein, or
    (iv) If service was by registered mail, by an affidavit made by the 
person mailing the subpoena that it was mailed as provided herein and by 
the signed return post-office receipt. Where the subpoena is issued on 
behalf of the Secretary and service is by mail, the return receipt 
without an affidavit or certificate of mailing shall be sufficient proof 
of service.
    (4) In making personal service, the person making service shall 
leave a copy of the subpoena with the person subpoenaed, or, if such 
person is not immediately available, with any other responsible person 
authorized to accept service residing or employed at the place of 
residence or business of the person subpoenaed.
    (5) The original of the subpoena, bearing or accompanied by the 
required proof of service, shall be returned to the official who issued 
the same. The party at whose request the subpoena is issued shall be 
responsible for the service thereof.


<R05>
Sec. 283.14  Fees of witnesses.

    Witnesses summoned under these rules shall be paid the same fees and 
expenses that are paid witnesses in the courts of the United States. 
Fees shall be paid by the party at whose request the witness appears. 
Current Federal, State, or local government employees shall not be 
eligible to receive witness fees.

[[Page 887]]


<R05>
Sec. 283.15  Procedure for hearing.

    (a) Request for hearing. A party may request a hearing on the facts 
by including such request in its Appeal Petition or Answer, whichever is 
appropriate. Failure to request a hearing within the time specified 
shall constitute a waiver of the opportunity for such a hearing, except 
as provided for under Sec. 283.4(i). In the event FCS denies any 
material facts and fails to request a hearing, the matter may be set 
down for hearing on motion of the State agency or upon the ALJ's own 
motion.
    (b) Time and place. If any material issue of fact is joined by the 
pleadings, the ALJ, upon motion of any party, stating that the matter is 
ready for hearing, shall set a time for the hearing, as soon as feasible 
thereafter, with due regard for the public interest and the convenience 
and necessity of the State agency and FCS. The hearing shall be held at 
the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, DC. Upon a showing of 
unusual or extraordinary circumstances, the ALJ may order that the 
hearing be held at another location. The ALJ shall file a notice stating 
the time and place of the hearing. If any change in the time of the 
hearing is made, the ALJ shall file a notice of such change, which 
notice shall be served upon the parties, unless it is made during the 
course of an oral hearing and made a part of the transcript or actual 
notice given to the parties.
    (c) Appearances. The parties may appear in person or by attorney of 
record in the appeal or by any other designated representative. Any 
person who appears as attorney or as a party's designated representative 
must conform to the standards of ethical conduct required by 
practitioners before the courts of the United States.
    (d) Exchange of witness and rebuttal witness lists, statements and 
exhibits. (1) Witness and rebuttal witness lists, copies of prior 
statements of proposed witnesses, and copies of proposed hearing 
exhibits, including copies of any written statements or depositions that 
a party intends to offer in lieu of live testimony in accordance with 
Sec. 283.12(a)(7), shall be exchanged at least 15 days in advance of the 
hearing or at such other time as may be set by the ALJ.
    (2) A witness whose name does not appear on the witness list shall 
not be permitted to testify and exhibits which were not provided to the 
opposing party as provided above shall not be admitted into evidence at 
the hearing absent a showing of cause and as authorized by the ALJ.
    (e) Deparment of attorney or representative. (1) Whenever an ALJ 
finds that a person acting as attorney or designated representative for 
any party to the appeal is guilty of unethical or contumacious conduct 
in, or in connection with an appeal, the ALJ may order that such person 
be precluded from further acting as attorney or representative in the 
appeal. Review by the Judicial Officer may be taken on any such order, 
but no appeal of the QC claim shall be delayed or suspended pending 
disposition of the debarment review by the Judicial Officer. Provided, 
however, that the ALJ shall suspend the appeal of the QC claim for a 
reasonable time for the purpose of enabling the party to obtain another 
attorney or representative.
    (2) Whenever it is found, after notice and opportunity for hearing, 
that a person who is acting or who has acted as attorney or 
representative for another person in any proceeding before the U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, is unfit to act as such counsel because of 
such unethical or contumacious conduct, such person will be precluded 
from acting as the attorney or representative in any or all proceedings 
before the Department as found to be appropriate.
    (f) Failure to appear. (1) If FCS or the State agency, after being 
duly notified, fails to appear at the hearing without cause, that party 
shall be deemed to have waived the opportunity for an oral hearing and 
to have admitted any facts which may be presented at the hearing. Such 
failure by either party shall also constitute an admission of all the 
material allegations of fact contained in any pleadings submitted by the 
other party. The party who appears shall have the option of whether to 
follow the procedure under Sec. 283.7 or to present evidence, in whole 
or in part, in the form of declarations or by oral testimony before the 
ALJ.

[[Page 888]]

    (2) Failure to appear at a hearing shall not be deemed to be a 
waiver of the right to be served with a copy of the ALJ's initial 
decision, to file a motion for reconsideration pursuant to 
Sec. 283.17(d) or to seek review by the Judicial Officer in accordance 
with Sec. 283.20.
    (g) Order of proceeding. Except as may be decided otherwise by the 
ALJ, FCS shall proceed first at the hearing. FCS has the burden of 
proving, by a preponderance of the evidence, the QC claim against the 
State agency for a QC error rate in excess of the tolerance level. The 
State agency will proceed second and must prove, by a preponderance of 
the evidence, the facts upon which it bases its appeal.
    (h) Evidence. (1) The testimony of witnesses at a hearing shall be 
on oath or affirmation and subject to cross-examination.
    (2) Upon a finding of cause, the ALJ may order that any witness be 
examined separately and apart from all other witnesses except those who 
may be parties to the appeal or whose presence is shown by a party to be 
essential to the presentation of the party's cause.
    (3) After a witness called by either party has testified on direct 
examination, any other party may request and obtain the production of 
any statement, or part thereof, of such witness in the possession of the 
opposing party which relates to the subject matter as to which the 
witness has testified. Such production shall be made according to the 
procedures and subject to the definitions and limitations prescribed in 
the Jencks Act (18 U.S.C. 3500).
    (4) Evidence which is immaterial, irrelevant, or unduly repetitious, 
or which is not of the sort upon which responsible persons are 
accustomed to rely, shall be excluded by order of the ALJ insofar as 
practicable.
    (i) Inclusion in the record. At the oral hearing or as ordered by 
the ALJ, depositions to the extent deemed admissible, written 
interrogatories, written requests for admission and respective responses 
may be offered in evidence by the party at whose instance they were 
taken. If not offered by such party, they may be offered in whole or in 
part by any other party. If only part of a deposition, written 
interrogatory, written request for admission or response thereto is 
offered in evidence by a party, any other party may require that all of 
it, which is relevant to the part introduced, be offered, and any party 
may introduce any other parts. Such depositions, written 
interrogatories, written requests for admission and respective responses 
thereto shall be admissible in evidence subject to such objections as to 
relevancy, materiality or competency of the testimony as were noted at 
the time of their taking or are made at the time they are offered in 
evidence.
    (j) Objections. (1) If a party objects to the admission of any 
evidence or to the limitation of the scope of any examination or cross 
examination or to any other ruling by the ALJ, the party shall state 
briefly the grounds of such objection, whereupon an automatic exception 
will follow if the objection is overruled by the ALJ.
    (2) Only objections made before the ALJ may be subsequently relied 
upon on review by the Judicial Officer.
    (k) Exhibits. Four copies of each exhibit shall be filed with the 
ALJ. However, where there are more than two parties in the appeal, an 
additional copy shall be filed for each additional party. A true copy of 
an exhibit may be substituted for the original.
    (l) Official records or documents. An official government record or 
document or entry therein, if admissible for any purpose, shall be 
admissible in evidence without the production of the person who made or 
prepared the same, and shall be prima facie evidence of the relevant 
facts stated therein. Such record or document shall be evidenced by an 
official publication thereof or by a copy certified by a person having 
legal authority to make such certification.
    (m) Official notice. Official notice shall be taken of such matters 
as are judicially noticed by the courts of the United States and of any 
other matter of technical, scientific, or commercial fact of established 
character. Provided, that the parties shall be given adequate 
opportunity to show that such facts are erroneously noticed.

[[Page 889]]

    (n) Offer of proof. Whenever evidence is excluded by the ALJ, the 
party offering such evidence may make an offer of proof, which shall be 
included in the transcript. The offer of proof shall consist of a brief 
statement describing the evidence excluded. If the evidence consists of 
a brief oral statement, it shall be included in the transcript in toto. 
If the evidence consists of a document or other exhibit, it shall be 
marked for identification and inserted in the hearing record. In either 
event, if the Judicial Officer, upon review, determines that the ALJ's 
ruling excluding the evidence was erroneous and prejudicial, the 
evidence shall be considered a part of the transcript and hearing 
record. If the Judicial Officer determines that the ALJ's ruling 
excluding the evidence was erroneous and prejudicial, and that it would 
inappropriate to have such evidence considered a part of the hearing 
record without reopening the hearing, the Judicial Officer may direct 
that the hearing be reopened to permit the taking of such evidence or 
for any other purpose in connection with the excluded evidence.
    (o) Transcript. Hearings shall be recorded and transcribed verbatim. 
The party requesting the hearing shall bear the transcription cost of 
producing the transcript and the duplication cost for one transcript 
provided to the ALJ and to the other parties to the appeal.


<R05>
Sec. 283.16  Consolidation of issues.

    Similar issues involved in appeals by two or more State agencies may 
be consolidated upon motion by the State agencies, FCS, or at the 
discretion of the ALJ if it is decided that consolidation would help to 
promote administrative efficiency.
    (a)  Disposition of consolidated issues. If the ALJ orders 
consolidation, the issues consolidated will be considered first. If a 
hearing has been requested by any of the parties that have had issues 
consolidated, arguments on the consolidated issues will be heard before 
arguments on dissimilar issues. The ALJ will take the information into 
consideration along with arguments on other issues in preparing initial 
decisions for QC appeals in which some issues have been consolidated.
    (b)  Initial decision. (1) If the ALJ decides the evidence and 
arguments by the State agencies on the consolidated issues cannot be 
overcome by the evidence presented by FCS and are sufficient to grant 
the relief requested by a State agency or all State agencies in which 
the issue is involved, the ALJ shall prepare an initial decision as 
provided in Sec. 283.17(c).
    (2) FCS may file a motion for reconsideration pursuant to 
Sec. 283.17(d) or seek review by the Judicial Officer in accordance with 
Sec. 283.20.


<R05>
Sec. 283.17  Post-hearing procedure.

    (a) Corrections to transcript. (1) At any time, but not later than 
the time fixed for filing proposed findings of fact, conclusions of law, 
order and briefs, any party may file a motion proposing corrections to 
the transcript.
    (2) Unless a party files such a motion in the matter prescribed, the 
transcript shall be presumed to be a true, correct, and complete 
transcript of the testimony given at the hearing and to contain an 
accurate description or reference to all exhibits received in evidence 
and made part of the hearing record. The transcript shall be deemed to 
be certified without further action by the ALJ.
    (3) At any time prior to the filing of the ALJ's initial decision 
and after consideration of any objections filed as to the transcript, 
the ALJ may issue an order making any corrections in the transcript that 
the ALJ finds are warranted. Such corrections shall be entered into the 
original transcript by the Hearing Clerk (without obscuring the original 
text).
    (b) Proposed findings of fact, conclusions of law, order, and 
briefs. The parties may file proposed findings of fact, conclusions of 
law and orders based solely upon the record and on officially noticed 
matters, and briefs in support thereof. briefs may be filed at the 
discretion of the ALJ. The ALJ shall announce at the hearing the time 
within which these documents may be filed.
    (c) ALJ's initial decision. (1) The ALJ shall decide the appeal not 
later than 60 days after receipt of rebuttal evidence submitted by the 
State agency or, if the State agency does not submit rebuttal evidence, 
not later than 90

[[Page 890]]

days after the State agency submits the notice of appeal and evidence in 
support of the appeal. In accordance with Sec. 283.22(f), the ALJ may, 
upon motion or sua sponte, extend this deadline for cause shown.
    (2) The ALJ shall prepare, upon the basis of the record and 
officially noticed matters, and shall file, an initial decision which 
shall include a decision on a request for good cause relief, a copy of 
which shall be served upon each of the parties.
    (3) Such initial decision shall be considered final for purposes of 
judicial review without further proceedings, unless there is a motion 
for reconsideration filed pursuant to Sec. 283.17(d) or review by the 
Judicial Officer is sought pursuant to Sec. 283.20.
    (4) If no motion for reconsideration or review by the Judicial 
Officer is filed, the initial decision shall constitute the final notice 
of determination for purposes of judicial review and shall become 
effective 30 day after service.
    (d) Motion for reconsideration. (1) Except as provided in paragraph 
(d)(4) of this section, any party may file a motion for reconsideration 
of the initial decision within 30 days of service of the initial 
decision. If served by mail, the time for filing a motion for 
reconsideration will be 5 days longer in accordance with Sec. 283.22.
    (2) Every such motion must set forth the mattes claimed to have been 
erroneously decided and the basis of the alleged errors. Such motion 
shall be accompanied by a supporting brief.
    (3) Responses to such motions shall be filed in accordance with 
Sec. 283.18(d).
    (4) No party may file a motion for reconsideration of an initial 
decision that has been revised in response to a previous motion for 
reconsideration.
    (5) The ALJ may dispose of a motion for reconsideration by denying 
it or by issuing a revised initial decision.
    (6) If the ALJ denies a motion for reconsideration, the initial 
decision shall constitute the final notice of determination for purposes 
of judicial review and shall become effective 30 days after service 
unless review by the Judicial Officer is sought in accordance with 
Sec. 283.20.
    (7) If the ALJ issues a revised initial decision, that decision 
shall constitute the final notice of determination for purposes of 
judicial review and shall become effective 30 days after service unless 
review by the Judicial Officer is sought in accordance with Sec. 283.20.


<R05>
Sec. 283.18  Motions and requests.

    (a) Filing. All motions and requests shall be filed with the Hearing 
Clerk, and served upon all the parties by the moving or requesting 
party, except motions and requests made on the record during the oral 
hearing. The ALJ assigned to the appeal or the Chief Judge shall rule 
upon all motions and requests filed or made prior to seeking review of 
the ALJ's initial decision pursuant to Sec. 283.20, except motions 
directly relating to such review. Thereafter, the Judicial Officer shall 
rule on any motions and requests as well as the motions directly 
relating to the review of the ALJ's initial decision.
    (b) Time for filing. Any motion or request may be filed at any time, 
except that:
    (1) Motions to dismiss pursuant to Sec. 283.5 must be filed within 
the time allowed for filing an answer; and
    (2) Motions for reconsideration must be filed within 30 days of 
service of the ALJ's initial decision pursuant to Sec. 283.17(d).
    (c) Contents. All written motions and requests shall state the 
particular order, ruling, or action desired and the grounds therefor.
    (d) Response to motions and requests. Within 10 days after service 
of any written motion or request or within such shorter or longer period 
as may be fixed by the ALJ or Judicial Officer, an opposing party may 
file a response to the motion or request. The moving party shall have no 
right to reply to the response; however, the ALJ or Judicial Officer may 
order that a reply be filed.
    (e) Certification to the Judicial Officer. The submission or 
certification of any motion, request, objection, or other question to 
the Judicial Officer prior to the seeking of review pursuant to 
Sec. 283.20 shall be made by and in the discretion of the ALJ. The ALJ 
may either rule upon or certify the motion,

[[Page 891]]

request, objection, or other question to the Judicial Officer, but not 
both.


<R05>
Sec. 283.19  ALJs.

    (a) Assignment. No ALJ shall be assigned to serve in any appeal who:
    (1) Has any pecuniary interest in any matter or business involved in 
the appeal,
    (2) Is related by blood or marriage to any party in the appeal, or
    (3) Has any conflict of interest which might impair the ALJ's 
objectivity in the appeal.
    (b) Disqualification of ALJ. (1) Any party to the appeal may, by 
motion, request that the ALJ withdraw from the appeal on one or more of 
the grounds set out in paragraph (a) of this section. Such motion shall 
set forth with particularity the alleged grounds for disqualification. 
The ALJ may then either rule upon or certify the motion to the Judicial 
Officer, but not both.
    (2) The ALJ may withdraw from any appeal for any reason deemed by 
the ALJ to be disqualifying.
    (c) Powers. (1) Subject to review as provided elsewhere in this 
part, the ALJ, in any assigned appeal, shall have the power to:
    (i) Rule upon motions and requests;
    (ii) Set the time and place of a pre-hearing conference and the time 
of the hearing, adjourn the hearing from time to time, and change the 
time of the hearing;
    (iii) Administer oaths and affirmations;
    (iv) Regulate the scope and timing of discovery;
    (v) Issue and enforce subpoenas as authorized under 7 U.S.C. 2023(a) 
and these rules;
    (vi) Summon and examine witnesses and receive evidence at the 
hearing;
    (vii) Appoint expert witnesses in accordance with the provisions of 
Rule 706 of the Federal Rules of Evidence;
    (viii) Admit or exclude evidence;
    (ix) Hear oral argument on facts or law;
    (x) Upon motion of a party, decide cases, in whole or in part, by 
non-oral hearing procedures under subpart C of this part where there is 
no disputed material issue of fact;
    (xi) Perform all acts and take all measures necessary for the 
maintenance of order, including the exclusion of contumacious counsel or 
other persons;
    (xii) Take all other actions authorized under the Act and these 
rules, including the extension of time upon motion of a party or sua 
sponte for cause shown.
    (2) The ALJ may not rule upon the validity of Federal statutes or 
regulations.
    (d) Who may act in the absence of the ALJ. In case of the absence of 
the ALJ or the ALJ's inability to act, the powers and duties to be 
performed by the ALJ under these rules of practice in connection with 
any assigned appeal may, without abatement of the appeal, unless 
otherwise directed by the Chief Judge, be assigned to any other ALJ.


<R05>
Sec. 283.20  Review by the Judicial Officer.

    (a) Filing of review petition. (1) Within 30 days after service of 
the ALJ's initial decision, or any part thereof, any party may seek 
Judicial Officer review of such decision by filing a review petition 
with the Hearing Clerk. However, if another party files a motion for 
reconsideration under Sec. 283.17(d), consideration of the review 
petition shall be stayed automatically pending resolution of the motion 
for reconsideration. If a motion for reconsideration is timely filed, a 
review petition may be filed within 30 days after the ALJ denies the 
motion or issues a revised initial decision, whichever applies.
    (2) As provided in Sec. 283.15(h), objections made before the ALJ 
regarding evidence or regarding a limitation on examination or cross-
examination or other ruling may be relied upon in a Judicial Officer 
review.
    (3) Each issue set forth in the review petition, and the arguments 
thereon, shall be plainly and concisely stated; and shall contain 
detailed citations to the record, statutes, regulations or authorities 
being relied upon in support thereof. A brief in support may be filed 
simultaneously with the review petition.
    (b) Response to review petition. Within 30 days after service of a 
copy of a review petition and any brief in support thereof, any other 
party to the proceedings may file a response in support

[[Page 892]]

of or in opposition to the review petition and in such response any 
relevant issue, not presented in the review petition, may be raised.
    (c) Transmittal of the record. (1) Whenever a review petition of an 
ALJ's initial decision is filed and a response thereto has been filed or 
time for filing a response has expired, the Hearing Clerk shall transmit 
to the Judicial Officer the record of the appeal.
    (2) Such record shall include: The pleadings; motions and requests 
filed and rulings thereon; the transcript of the testimony taken at the 
hearing, together with the exhibits filed in connection therewith; any 
documents or papers filed in connection with a prehearing conference; 
such proposed findings of fact, conclusions of law, orders, and briefs 
in support thereof, as may have been filed in connection with the 
appeal; the ALJ's initial decision; the motion for reconsideration of 
the ALJ's initial decision; the ALJ's initial decision on the motion for 
reconsideration and the review petition, and such briefs in support 
thereof and responses thereto as may have been filed.
    (d) Oral argument. A party filing a review petition may request, 
within the prescribed time for filing such review petition, an 
opportunity for oral argument before the Judicial Officer. Within the 
time allowed for filing a response, the responding party may file a 
request for such oral argument. Failure to make such request to appear 
before the Judicial Officer, within the prescribed time period, shall be 
deemed a waiver of the opportunity for oral argument. There is no right 
to appear personally before the Judicial Officer. The Judicial Officer 
may grant, refuse, or limit any request for oral argument. Oral argument 
shall not be transcribed unless so ordered in advance by the Judicial 
Officer for cause shown upon request of a party or upon the Judicial 
Officer's own motion.
    (e) Scope of argument. Argument to be heard by the Judicial Officer 
on review, whether oral or on brief, shall be limited to the issues 
raised in the review petition to the Judicial Officer or in the response 
to such petition, except that if the Judicial Officer determines that 
additional issues should be argued, the parties shall be given 
reasonable notice of such determination, so as to permit adequate 
preparation on all issues to be argued.
    (f) Notice of argument; postponement. The Hearing Clerk shall advise 
all parties of the time and place at which oral argument will be heard. 
A request for postponement of the argument must be made by motion filed 
within a reasonable time in advance of the date fixed for argument.
    (g) Order of argument. The appellant is entitled to commence and 
conclude the argument.
    (h) Submission of briefs. By agreement of the parties, a review may 
be submitted for decision on the briefs, but the Judicial Officer may 
direct that the review be argued orally.
    (i) Additional evidence. If any party demonstrates to the 
satisfaction of the Judicial Officer that additional evidence not 
presented to the ALJ is material, not cumulative, and that there were 
reasonable grounds for the failure to present such evidence to the ALJ, 
the Judicial Officer shall remand the matter to the ALJ for 
consideration of such additional evidence.
    (j) Decision of the Judicial Officer on review. (1) As soon as 
practicable after the receipt of the record from the Hearing Clerk, or, 
in case oral argument was had, as soon as practicable thereafter, the 
Judicial Officer, upon the basis of the record and any matter of which 
official notice is taken, shall rule on the review.
    (2) The Judicial Officer may adopt, reduce, reverse, compromise, 
remand or approve settlement of any claim initially decided by the ALJ 
under this part.
    (3) The Judicial Officer shall promptly serve each party to the 
appeal with a copy of the ruling of the Judicial Officer which shall be 
considered the final determination and contain a statement describing 
the right to seek judicial review.
    (4) Judicial review must be sought within 30 days of service of the 
final notice of determination by the Judicial Officer pursuant to 7 
U.S.C. 2023(a).


<R05>
Sec. 283.21  Ex parte communications.

    (a) ALJ; Judicial Officer. At no time prior to the issuance of the 
final decision shall the ALJ or Judicial Officer

[[Page 893]]

discuss ex parte the merits of the appeal or review with any person who 
is connected with the appeal or review in an advocative or in an 
investigative capacity, or with any representative of such person. 
However, procedural matters shall not be included within this 
limitation; and furthermore, the ALJ or Judicial Officer may discuss the 
merits of the case with such a person if all parties to the appeal or 
review, or their attorneys have been given notice and an opportunity to 
participate. A memorandum of such discussion shall be included in the 
record.
    (b) Parties; interested persons. No party or other interested person 
shall make or knowingly cause to be made to the ALJ or Judicial Officer 
an ex parte communication relevant to the merits of the appeal or 
review.
    (c) Procedure. If the ALJ or Judicial Officer receives an ex parte 
communication in violation of this section, the one who receives the 
communication shall place in the public record of the appeal or review:
    (1) All such written communications;
    (2) Memoranda stating the substance of all such oral communications; 
and
    (3) Copies of all written responses, and memoranda stating the 
substance of all oral responses thereto.
    (4) Upon receipt of a communication knowingly made or knowingly 
caused to be made by a party in violation of this section, the ALJ or 
Judicial Officer may, to the extent consistent with the interests of 
justice and the policy of the underlying statute, require the party to 
show cause why its claim or interest in the appeal or review should not 
be dismissed, denied, disregarded or otherwise adversely affected on 
account of such violation.
    (d) Decision. To the extent consistent with the interests of justice 
and the policy of the underlying statute, a violation of this section 
shall be sufficient grounds for a decision adverse to the party who 
knowingly commits a violation of this section or who knowingly causes 
such a violation to occur.


<R05>
Sec. 283.22  Form; filing; service; proof of service; computation of time; and extensions of time.

    (a) Form. (1) The original and two copies of all papers in a 
proceeding conducted under this subpart shall be filed with the Hearing 
Clerk.
    (2) Every pleading and paper filed in the proceeding shall contain a 
caption setting forth the title of the action, the docket number 
assigned by the Hearing Clerk, and a descriptive title (e.g., Motion for 
Extension of Time).
    (3) Every pleading and paper shall be signed by and contain the 
address and telephone number of the representative for the party on 
whose behalf the paper was filed.
    (b) Filing. Papers are considered filed when they are postmarked, 
or, received, if hand delivered. Date of mailing may be established by a 
certificate from the party or representative or by proof that the 
document was sent by certified or registered mail.
    (c) Service. A party filing a document with the ALJ shall, at the 
time of filing, serve a copy of such document on every other party. 
Service upon any party of any document shall be made by delivering or 
mailing a copy to the party's last known address. When a party is 
represented by an attorney or designated representative, service shall 
be made upon such attorney or representative in lieu of the actual 
party.
    (d) Proof of service. A certificate of the person serving the 
document by personal delivery or by mail, setting forth the date, time 
and manner of service, shall be proof of service.
    (e) Computation of time.
    (1) In computing any period of time under this part or in an order 
issued thereunder, the time begins with the day following the act, 
event, or default, and includes the last day of the period, unless it is 
a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday observed by the Federal Government, 
in which event it includes the next business day.
    (2) When a document has been served by mail, an additional five days 
will be added to the time permitted for any response.
    (f) Extensions of time. Requests for extensions of time shall be 
submitted to the ALJ, Chief Judge or the Judicial Officer prior to the 
expiration of the original due date. The time for the filing of any 
document or paper required or authorized under the rules in this part 
may be extended by the ALJ, Chief Judge or the Judicial Officer, if,

[[Page 894]]

in the judgment of the ALJ, Chief Judge or the Judicial Officer, there 
is cause for the extension. In instances where the time permits notice 
of the request for extension, time shall be given to the other party to 
submit views concerning the request.


<R05>
Sec. 283.23  Procedural matters.

    (a) Communications from Hearing Clerk. In order to expedite the 
appeal process, the Hearing Clerk may develop form letters and 
transmittal forms to be used for notices, service of papers, requests 
for information, and all other communications between the Hearing 
Clerk's Office and the parties.
    (b) Representation. All parties may be represented by attorneys or 
by designated representatives. Attorneys or designated representatives 
appearing for the parties shall file formal notices of appearances and 
withdrawals with the Hearing Clerk.


<R04>
   Subpart C--Summary Procedure for Appeals of QC Claims of Less Than 
                                 $50,000


<R05>
Sec. 283.24  Incorporation of procedures by reference.

    Except as otherwise provided, the following procedures detailed in 
subpart B of this part shall apply to appeals of QC claims of less than 
$50,000: Secs. 283.5 Motion to Dismiss; 283.6 Answer; 283.8 Rebuttal or 
Amendment of Appeal or Answer; 283.9 Withdrawal of Appeal; 283.10 
Consent Decision; 283.18 Motions and Requests; 283.19 ALJ's; 283.20 
Review by the Judicial Officer; 283.21 Ex Parte Communications; 283.22 
Filings; Service; Extensions of Time; and Computations of Time; and 
283.23 Procedural Matters.


<R05>
Sec. 283.25  Filing appeals for QC claims of less than $50,000.

    (a) Time. A State agency may appeal the bill for collection from FCS 
for a QC claim of less than $50,000 for a food stamp QC error rate in 
excess of the tolerance level. A State agency must file a written notice 
of appeal, in accordance with this section, within 10 days of receipt of 
the bill for collection from FCS for a QC claim of less than $50,000. 
The State agency may request an extension to the 10-day filing 
requirement in accordance with Sec. 283.22(f). FCS shall issue the bill 
for collection by certified mail or personal service.
    (b) Exhaustion of administrative remedies. The State agency must 
appeal the bill for collection to the ALJ, pursuant to this subpart, and 
exhaust the available administrative remedies before filing suit in the 
Federal District Courts.
    (c) Filing. The notice of appeal shall be filed with the Hearing 
Clerk.
    (d) Content of the notice of appeal. (1) A notice of appeal, in 
order to be considered acceptable must contain the following 
information:
    (i) A brief and clear statement that it is an appeal from a QC claim 
of less than $50,000 identifying the period the claim covers, the date 
and amount of the bill for collection, and the date of receipt of the 
bill for collection;
    (ii) Identification of the State agency as the appellant and FCS as 
the appellee;
    (iii) A statement that the notice of appeal is filed pursuant to 
section 14(a) of the Food Stamp Act;
    (iv) A true copy of the bill for collection which constitutes the 
basis for the filing of the notice of appeal shall be attached to the 
notice.
    (2) Failure to file an acceptable notice of appeal may result in a 
challenge by FCS to the notice and dismissal of the notice by the ALJ 
and a waiver of the opportunity for further appeal or review by the 
Judicial Officer unless the State agency pursues the options as 
discussed in Secs. 283.17(d) and 283.20.
    (e) Receipt of notice of appeal and assignment of docket number. 
Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the Hearing Clerk shall assign the 
appeal a docket number. The Hearing Clerk shall:
    (1) Send the State agency a letter which shall include the following 
information:
    (i) Advise that the notice of appeal has been received and the date 
of receipt;
    (ii) The docket number assigned to the appeal and instructions that 
all future communications related to the appeal shall reference the 
docket number, and;
    (iii) That the State agency must file and serve its appeal petition, 
as set forth in Sec. 283.22 not later than 60 days

[[Page 895]]

after receiving a notice of the claim. Failure to file a timely appeal 
petition may result in a waiver of further appeal rights.
    (2) Send FCS a copy of the notice of appeal and a copy of the letter 
to the State agency.
    (f) Stay of collection. The filing of a timely notice of appeal 
shall automatically stay the action of FCS to collect the QC claim 
asserted against the State agency until a decision is reached on the 
acceptability of the appeal, and in the case of an acceptable appeal, 
until a final administrative determination has been issued. However, 
interest will accrue on the outstanding claim amount during the stay as 
provided in section 13(a)(1) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977, as amended 
(7 U.S.C. 2022(a)(1)).
    (g) Content of appeal petition. The appeal petition shall include:
    (1) A brief statement of the allegations of fact and provisions of 
law that constitute the basis for the appeal including a statement as to 
whether a factual basis for good cause relief exists, and
    (2) The nature of the relief sought.
    (h) FCS answer. Upon service of the State agency appeal petition, 
FCS shall file an answer, pursuant to Sec. 283.6, not later than 60 days 
after the State agency submits its appeal petition.


<R05>
Sec. 283.26  Request that appeals be handled under procedures in subpart B for appeals of QC claims of $50,000 or more.

    (a) If, after the filing of its appeal petition, the State agency 
does not believe that the summary procedure provided in this subpart is 
adequate for handling the appeal and that an oral hearing is necessary, 
the State agency may file, no later than the date established for the 
conclusion of any discovery pursuant to Sec. 283.29, a motion that its 
appeal be handled under the procedures in subpart B of this part.
    (b) The motion shall specify why the State agency believes that the 
summary procedure is inadequate and what harm will result if an oral 
hearing is not held.
    (c) FCS will have 10 days from service of the State agency's motion 
that the appeal be handled under subpart B of this part to submit 
arguments either in support of or against the State agency's position.
    (d) The ALJ will review the State agency's motion and the 
information submitted by FCS and decide which procedures shall be used 
in the appeal.


<R05>
Sec. 283.27  Procedures upon failure to file an answer.

    The failure by FCS to file an answer shall constitute a waiver of 
the opportunity to file a cross motion for summary judgment pursuant to 
Sec. 283.30. Upon such failure to file, the State agency shall file a 
proposed decision, along with a motion for adoption thereof, both of 
which shall be served upon FCS by the State agency. Within 10 days after 
service of such motion and proposed decision, FCS may file with the 
Hearing Clerk objections thereto. If the ALJ finds that meritorious 
objections have been filed, the State agency's motion shall be denied 
with supporting reasons. If meritorious objections are not filed, the 
ALJ shall issue an initial decision without further procedures. Copies 
of the decision or denial of State agency's motion shall be served on 
each of the parties and shall be included as part of the official 
record. Where the decision as proposed by the State agency is adopted as 
the ALJ's initial decision, such decision of the ALJ shall become final 
and effective 30 days after service unless reconsideration or review by 
the Judicial Officer is sought as discussed in Secs. 283.17(d) and 
283.20.


<R05>
Sec. 283.28  Discovery.

    Upon motion and as ordered by the ALJ, written interrogatories, 
written requests for admissions and written requests for the production 
of documents, may be served by any party to the appeal upon any other 
party and used in accordance with Sec. 283.12(b).


<R05>
Sec. 283.29  Scheduling conference.

    (a) Time and place. The ALJ shall direct the parties or their 
counsel to attend a scheduling conference following the filing of a 
notice of appeal pursuant to Sec. 283.25. The scheduling conference 
shall be held at the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, DC. 
Reasonable notice of the time and place of the

[[Page 896]]

scheduling conference shall be given. The ALJ may order each of the 
parties to furnish at the scheduling conference the following:
    (1) An outline of the appeal or defense;
    (2) The legal theories upon which the party will rely;
    (3) Copies of or a list of documents that the party anticipates 
relying upon;
    (b) Procedures. The ALJ shall not order any of the foregoing 
procedures that a party can show are inappropriate or unwarranted under 
the circumstances of the particular appeal.
    (c) Scheduling conference. At the scheduling conference, the 
following matters shall be considered:
    (1) The simplification of issues;
    (2) The necessity of amendments to pleadings;
    (3) Stipulations of facts and of the authenticity, accuracy, and 
admissibility of documents;
    (4) Negotiation, compromise, or settlement of issues;
    (5) The exchange of copies of proposed exhibits;
    (6) The nature of and the date by which discovery, as provided in 
Sec. 283.28, must be completed;
    (7) The identification of documents or matters of which official 
notice may be requested;
    (8) A schedule to be followed by the parties for the filing of 
cross-motions for summary judgment and completion of other actions 
decided at the conference; and
    (9) Such other matters as may expedite and aid in the disposition of 
the appeal.
    (d) Reporting. A scheduling conference will not be stenographically 
reported unless so directed by the ALJ.
    (e) Attendance at scheduling conference. In the event the ALJ 
concludes that personal attendance by the ALJ and the parties or counsel 
at a scheduling conference is unwarranted or impractical, but decides 
that a conference would expedite the appeal, the ALJ may conduct such 
conference by telephone.
    (f) Order. Actions taken as a result of a conference shall be 
reduced to an appropriate written order, unless the ALJ concludes that a 
stenographic report shall suffice.


<R05>
Sec. 283.30  Cross motions for summary judgment.

    Appeals filed pursuant to this subpart shall be determined upon 
cross motions for summary judgment unless the matter is heard under 
subpart B of this part in accordance with Sec. 283.26. Cross motions for 
summary judgment shall be filed by the parties along with the appeal 
petition and answer or in accordance with the schedule established by 
the ALJ pursuant to Sec. 283.29. Motions for summary judgment shall 
address the issues raised by the pleadings and may be supported by 
declarations. Motions and accompanying briefs in support of summary 
judgment shall not exceed 35 pages excluding exhibits unless otherwise 
authorized by the ALJ. Reply briefs may be filed by the parties in 
accordance with the schedule established by the ALJ. Reply briefs may 
not exceed 15 pages in length, excluding exhibits.


<R05>
Sec. 283.31  Review of the record.

    (a) The ALJ shall review the cross motions for summary judgment, 
briefs, reply briefs and supporting materials submitted by both FCS and 
the State agency.
    (b) If the ALJ decides that additional information or briefing is 
required from a party, a request for such information or briefing shall 
be submitted to such party with a copy to the other party. The request 
shall identify the additional information or specific issues to be 
addressed and shall specify the date(s) by which such information or 
briefing must be provided. Upon receipt of such additional information 
or briefing, the ALJ shall provide the other party an opportunity to 
submit responsive information or briefing.
    (c) If the party to whom a request for additional information or 
briefing is made fails to submit the information or brief the issue(s) 
as requested, the ALJ may decide the appeal based on the existing 
record.
    (d) If the ALJ decides that oral argument is necessary on legal 
issues, the ALJ shall set a time for the oral arguments as soon as 
feasible thereafter, with due regard for the public interest

[[Page 897]]

and the convenience and necessity of the State agency and FCS. The oral 
arguments shall be held at the U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Washington, DC. Upon a showing of unusual or extraordinary 
circumstances, the ALJ may order that the argument be held at another 
location. The ALJ shall file a notice stating the time and place of the 
oral arguments. If any change in the time of the oral arguments is made, 
the ALJ shall file a notice of such change, which notice shall be served 
upon the parties, unless it is made during the course of the oral 
arguments and made a part of the transcript or actual notice given to 
the parties.
    (e) Oral argument shall not be transcribed unless so ordered in 
advance by the ALJ for cause shown upon request of a party or upon the 
ALJ's own motion.


<R05>
Sec. 283.32  ALJ's initial decision.

    (a) The ALJ shall decide the appeal not later than 60 days after 
receipt of rebuttal evidence submitted by the State agency pursuant to 
Sec. 283.8 or, if the State agency does not submit rebuttal evidence, 
not later than 90 days after the State agency submits the notice of 
appeal and evidence in support of the appeal. The ALJ may extend this 
deadline for cause shown.
    (b) The ALJ shall prepare, upon the basis of the record, and shall 
file an initial decision which shall include a decision on a request for 
good cause relief, a copy of which shall be served upon each of the 
parties.
    (c) Such initial decision shall constitute the final notice of 
determination for purposes of judicial review without further 
proceedings, unless there is a motion for reconsideration filed pursuant 
to Sec. 283.17(d) or review by the Judicial Officer is sought pursuant 
to Sec. 283.20.


<R03>
PART 284--PROVISION OF A NUTRITION ASSISTANCE PROGRAM FOR THE COMMONWEALTH OF THE NORTHERN MARIANA ISLANDS (CNMI) [RESERVED]

<R05>



<R03>
PART 285--PROVISION OF A NUTRITION ASSISTANCE GRANT FOR THE COMMONWEALTH OF PUERTO RICO--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
285.1  General purpose and scope.
285.2  Funding.
285.3  Plan of operation.
285.4  Audits.
285.5  Failure to comply.

    Authority: 7 U.S.C. 2011-2032.

    Source: Amdt. 209, 47 FR 32409, July 27, 1982, unless otherwise 
noted.


<R05>
Sec. 285.1  General purpose and scope.

    This part describes the general terms and conditions under which 
grant funds shall be provided by the Food and Consumer Service (FCS) to 
the government of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico for the purpose of 
designing and conducting a nutrition assistance program for needy 
persons. The Commonwealth of Puerto Rico is authorized to establish 
eligibility and benefit levels for the nutrition assistance program. In 
addition, with FCS approval, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico may employ 
a small proportion of the grant funds to finance projects that the 
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico believes likely to improve or stimulate 
agriculture, food production, and food distribution.


<R05>
Sec. 285.2  Funding.

    (a) FCS shall, consistent with the plan of operation required by 
Sec. 285.3 of this part, and subject to availability of funds, provide 
nutrition assistance grant funds to the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico to 
cover 100 percent of the expenditures related to food assistance

[[Page 898]]

provided to needy persons and 50 percent of the administrative expenses 
related to the food assistance. The amount of the grant funds provided 
to the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico shall not exceed amounts appropriated 
for this purpose for each fiscal year.
    (b) FCS shall, subject to the provisions in Secs. 285.3 and 285.5 in 
this part, and limited by the provisions of paragraph (a) of this 
section, pay to the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico for the applicable 
fiscal year, the amount estimated by the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico 
pursuant to Sec. 285.3(b)(4). Payments shall be made no less frequently 
than on a monthly basis prior to the beginning of each month consistent 
with the Treasury Fiscal Requirement Manual, Volume I, part 6, section 
2030; these letters of credit shall be drawn on an as-needed basis. The 
amount shall be reduced or increased to the extent of any prior 
overpayment or underpayment which FCS determines has been made and which 
has not been previoulsy adjusted. The payment(s) received by the 
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico for a fiscal year shall not exceed the total 
authorized for the grant, or the total cost for the nutrition assistance 
program eligible for funding, whichever is less, for that fiscal year.
    (c) FCS may recover from the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, through 
offsets to funding during any fiscal year, funds previously paid to the 
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and later determined by the Secretary to 
have been overpayments. Funds which may be recovered include, but are 
not limited to:
    (1) Costs not included in the approved plan of operation;
    (2) Unallowable costs discovered in audit or investigation findings;
    (3) Funds allocated to the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico which 
exceeded expenditures during the fiscal year for which the funds were 
authorized; or
    (4) Amounts owed to FCS as a result of the nutrition assistance 
grant which have been billed to the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and 
which the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico has failed to pay without cause 
acceptable to FCS.
    (d) Funds for payment of any prior fiscal year expenditures shall be 
claimed from the funding for that prior year. The payment of funds shall 
not exceed the authorization for that prior fiscal year.

[Amdt. 209, 47 FR 32409, July 27, 1982, as amended by Amdt. 243, 49 FR 
49585, Dec. 21, 1984; Amdt. 274, 51 FR 18752, May 21, 1986; Amdt. 371, 
61 FR 60012, Nov. 26, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 285.3  Plan of operation.

    (a) To receive payments for any fiscal year the Commonwealth of 
Puerto Rico shall have a plan of operation for that fiscal year approved 
by FCS. Each plan of operation shall be sumitted for FCS approval by the 
July 1 preceding the fiscal year for which the plan of operation is to 
be effective.
    (b) The plan of operation shall include the following information:
    (1) Designation of the agency or agencies directly responsible for 
administration, or supervision of the administration, of the nutrition 
assistance program.
    (2) A description of the needy persons residing in the Commonwealth 
of Puerto Rico and an assessment of the food and nutrition needs of 
these persons. The description and assessment shall demonstrate that the 
nutrition assistance program is directed toward the most needy persons 
in the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
    (3) A description of the program for nutrition assistance including:
    (i) A general description of the nutrition assistance to be provided 
the needy persons who will receive assistance, and any agencies 
designated to provide such assistance; and
    (ii) To the extent grant funds are not used for direct nutrition 
assistance payments to needy persons, the plan of operation must 
demonstrate that the grants funds will provide nutrition assistance 
benefiting needy persons in the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
    (4) A budget and an estimate of the monthly amounts of expenditures 
necessary for the provision of the nutrition assistance and related 
administrative expenses up to the monthly amounts provided for payment 
in Sec. 285.2.
    (5) Other reasonably related information which FCS may request.
    (6) An agreement signed by the governor or other appropriate 
official to

[[Page 899]]

conduct the nutrition assistance program in accordance with the FCS-
approved plan of operation and in compliance with all pertinent Federal 
rules and regulations. The Commonwealth of Puerto Rico shall also agree 
to comply with any changes in Federal law and regulations.
    (c) Any amendments to those provisions of the plan of operation 
specified in paragraph (b) of this section, must be submitted to FCS for 
approval.
    (d) FCS shall approve or disapprove any plan of operation no later 
than August 1 of the year of its submission. FCS approval of the plan of 
operation shall be based on an assessment that the nutrition assistance 
program, as defined in the plan of operation, is:
    (1) Sufficient to permit analysis and review;
    (2) Reasonably targeted to the most needy persons as defined in the 
plan of operation;
    (3) Supported by an assessment of the food and nutrition needs of 
needy persons;
    (4) Reasonable in terms of the funds requested;
    (5) Structured to include safeguards to prevent fraud, waste, and 
abuse in the use of grant funds; and
    (6) Consistent with all applicable Federal laws.
    (e) FCS shall approve or disapprove any amendments to those 
provisions of the plan of operation specified in paragraph (b) of this 
section. If FCS fails either to approve or deny the amendment, or to 
request additional information within 30 days, the amendment to the plan 
of operation is approved. If additional information is requested, the 
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico shall provide this as soon as possible, and 
FCS shall approve or deny the amendment to the plan of operation. 
Payment schedules and other program operations may not be altered until 
an amendment to the plan of operation is approved. The Commonwealth of 
Puerto Rico shall, for informational purposes, submit to FCS any 
amendments to those provisions of the plan of operation not specified in 
paragraph (b) of this section. Such submittal shall be made at least 30 
days prior to the effective date of the amendment. If circumstances 
warrant a waiver of the 30-day requirement, the Commonwealth of Puerto 
Rico shall submit a waiver request to FCS for consideration. Should FCS 
determine that such an amendment relates to the provisions of paragraph 
(b) of this section, FCS approval as established above will be necessary 
for the amendment to be implemented.
    (f) FCS may approve part of any plan of operation or amendment 
submitted by the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico contingent on appropriate 
action by the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico with respect to the problem 
areas in the plan of operation.
    (g) If all or part of the plan of operation is disapproved, FCS 
shall notify the appropriate agency in the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico 
of the problem area(s) in the plan of operation and the actions 
necessary to secure approval.
    (h) In accordance with the provisions of Sec. 285.5, funds may be 
withheld or denied when all or part of a plan of operation is 
disapproved.

[Amdt. 209, 47 FR 32409, July 27, 1982, as amended by Amdt. 239, 48 FR 
23805, May 27, 1983; Amdt. 243, 49 FR 49585, Dec. 21, 1984; Amdt. 274, 
51 FR 18752, May 21, 1986; Amdt. 371, 61 FR 60012, Nov. 26, 1996]


<R05>
Sec. 285.4  Audits.

    (a) The Commonwealth of Puerto Rico shall provide an audit of 
expenditures in compliance with the requirements in part 3015 of this 
title at least once every two years. The findings of such audit shall be 
reported to FCS no later than 120 days from the end of each fiscal year 
in which the audit is made.
    (b) Within 120 days of the end of each fiscal year, the Commonwealth 
of Puerto Rico shall provide FCS with a statement of: (1) Whether the 
grant funds received for that fiscal year exceeded the valid obligations 
made that year for which payment is authorized, and if so, by how much, 
and (2) such additional related information as FCS may require.

[Amdt. 209, 47 FR 32409, July 27, 1982. Redesignated by Amdt. 371, 61 FR 
60013, Nov. 26, 1996]

[[Page 900]]


<R05>
Sec. 285.5  Failure to comply.

    (a) Grant funds may be withheld in whole or in part, or denied if 
there is a substantial failure by the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico to 
comply with the requirements of Sec. 285.4, or to bring into compliance 
a plan of operation disapproved by FCS, or to comply with program 
requirements detailed in the plan of operation approved for that fiscal 
year. (For example, funds shall be paid to the Commonwealth of Puerto 
Rico to cover only the costs of the part or parts of the plan of 
operation receiving FCS approval. Withheld payments shall be paid when 
the unapproved part(s) of the plan are modified and approved.) FCS shall 
notify the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico that further payments shall not 
be made until FCS is satisfied that there will no longer be any such 
failure to comply.
    (b) Upon a finding of a substantial failure to comply with the 
requirements of Sec. 285.4 or the plan of operation, FCS may, in 
addition to or in lieu of actions taken in accordance with paragraph (a) 
of this section, refer the matter to the Attorney General with a request 
that injunctive relief be sought from the appropriate district court of 
the United States to require compliance with these regulations by the 
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.

[Amdt. 209, 47 FR 32409, July 27, 1982. Redesignated by Amdt. 371, 61 FR 
60013, Nov. 26, 1996]

[[Page 901]]


<R03>
                    SUBCHAPTER D--GENERAL REGULATIONS

<R05>


<R03>
PART 295--AVAILABILITY OF INFORMATION AND RECORDS TO THE PUBLIC--Table of Contents

<R05>


Sec.
295.1  General statement.
295.2  Organizational description.
295.3  Informational and educational publications.
295.4  Program evaluation status reports.
295.5  Program statistical reports.
295.6  Public inspection and copying.
295.7  Indexes.
295.8  Requests.
295.9  Appeals.

    Authority: 5 U.S.C. 301, 552; 7 CFR 1.1-1.23.

    Source: 61 FR 39047, July 26, 1996, unless otherwise noted.


<R05>
Sec. 295.1  General statement.

    This part is issued in accordance with the regulations of the 
Secretary of Agriculture at 7 CFR 1.1-1.23, and appendix A, implementing 
the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552). The Secretary's 
regulations, as implemented by the regulations in this part, govern the 
availability of records of FCS to the public.


<R05>
Sec. 295.2  Organizational description.

    The description of the central and field organization of FCS is 
published as a notice in the Federal Register and may be revised from 
time to time in like manner. Such description contains a listing of FCS 
headquarters and field organizational units and their functions.


<R05>
Sec. 295.3  Informational and educational publications.

    FCS publishes a wide variety of informational and educational 
periodicals, pamphlets, brochures, leaflets, guides, and educational 
aids explaining the operation of FCS food assistance programs. For more 
information concerning FCS publications and how to obtain them, write 
the Director, Public Information Staff, Food and Consumer Service, USDA, 
3101 Park Center Drive, Alexandria, VA 22302-1500.


<R05>
Sec. 295.4  Program evaluation status reports.

    FCS also publishes summaries of objectives and findings of completed 
studies and projects concerning evaluation of FCS food assistance 
programs. A copy of the current status report on completed studies may 
be obtained by writing the Director, Office of Analysis and Evaluation, 
Food and Consumer Service, USDA, 3101 Park Center Drive, Alexandria, VA 
22302-1500.


<R05>
Sec. 295.5  Program statistical reports.

    Current and historical information on FCS food assistance program 
size, monetary outlays, geographic distribution, racial and ethnic 
participation rates, and other data is published throughout the year. 
Limited supplies are available for public distribution upon request. 
Write the Director, Program Information Division, Food and Consumer 
Service, USDA, 3101 Park Center Drive, Alexandria, VA 22302-1500.


<R05>
Sec. 295.6  Public inspection and copying.

    5 U.S.C. 552(a)(2) requires that certain informational materials be 
made available for public inspection and copying. Such materials 
maintained by FCS may be inspected and copied during regular office 
hours (currently 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m.). Interested parties may submit 
requests to the FCS Records Management Officer, Information Technology 
Division, 3101 Park Center Drive, Alexandria, VA 22302-1500.


<R05>
Sec. 295.7  Indexes.

    5 U.S.C. 552(a)(2) also requires an index of the materials required 
to be made available for public inspection and copying be published 
quarterly. Copies of this Index for FCS materials will be maintained for 
public inspection and copying during regular office hours in FCS 
Library, Room 810, 3101 Park Center Drive, Alexandria, Va. 22302-1500. 
Free copies of the current index may be obtained by writing or visiting 
any of the FCS offices listed in the local telephone directory or those 
listed below:

[[Page 902]]

    (a) Records Management Officer, Information Technology Division, 
Food and Consumer Service, USDA, 3101 Park Center Drive, Alexandria, Va. 
22302-1500.
    (b) Director, Financial Management, Food and Consumer Service, USDA, 
300 Corporate Blvd., Mercer Corporate Park, Robbinsville, NJ 08691-1518.
    (c) Director, Financial Management, Food and Consumer Service, USDA, 
77 Forsyth Street, SW, Atlanta, GA 30303-3427.
    (d) Director, Financial and Administrative Management, Food and 
Consumer Service, USDA, 77 W. Jackson Blvd., Chicago, Illinois 60604-
3507.
    (e) Director, Financial Management, Food and Consumer Service, USDA, 
1100 Commerce St., Dallas, Texas 75242-9980.
    (f) Director, Financial Management, Food and Consumer Service, USDA, 
550 Kearney St., San Francisco, CA 94108-2518.
    (g) Director, Financial Management, Food and Consumer Service, USDA, 
10 Causeway Street, Boston, MA 02222-1069.
    (h) Director, Financial and Administrative Management, Food and 
Consumer Service, USDA, 1244 Speer Blvd., Denver, CO 80204-3581.


<R05>
Sec. 295.8  Requests.

    (a) Requests for FCS program records under 5 U.S.C. 552(a)(3) shall 
be made in accordance with USDA Administrative Regulations 7 CFR 1.6 and 
addressed to the appropriate FCS official listed below:
    (1) Food Stamp program records--Requests for Food Stamp information 
should be addressed to the Director of the appropriate Division (Program 
Development Division, Benefit Redemption Division, or Program 
Accountability Division) at the following address: Food and Consumer 
Service, USDA, 3101 Park Center Drive, Alexandria, VA, 22302-1500.
    (2) Child Nutrition Program records--Director, Child Nutrition 
Division, Food and Consumer Service, USDA, 3101 Park Center Drive, 
Alexandria, VA 22302-1500.
    (3) Food Distribution Program records--Director, Food Distribution 
Division, Food and Consumer Service, USDA, 3101 Park Center Drive, 
Alexandria, VA 22302-1500.
    (4) Supplemental Food Program records--Director, Supplemental Food 
Programs Division, Food and Consumer Service, USDA, 3101 Park Center 
Drive, Alexandria, VA 22302-1500.
    (b) If the requester is unable to determine the official to whom his 
request should be addressed, he should address it to: Freedom of 
Information Act Officer, Information Technology Division, 3101 Park 
Center Drive, Alexandria, VA 22302. The Freedom of Information Act 
Officer will refer such requests to the appropriate official.
    (c) The officials outlined in paragraph (a) are authorized to make 
determinations in accordance with USDA Administrative Regulations at 7 
CFR 1.8.


<R05>
Sec. 295.9  Appeals.

    (a) Any person whose request for records is denied shall have the 
right to appeal that denial in accordance with USDA Administrative 
Regulations 7 CFR 1.13. All appeals shall be addressed to: 
Administrator, Food and Consumer Service, USDA, 3101 Park Center Drive, 
Alexandria, VA 22302-1500.
    (b) The following officials are delegated authority to make 
decisions on Freedom of Information Act appeals at the address above:
    (1) Food Stamp program (general)--Deputy Administrator, Food Stamp 
Program;
    (2) Food Stamp program (appeals on names of Food Stamp Investigators 
and Investigative aids)--Director, Benefit Redemption Division;
    (3) Child Nutrition program--Deputy Administrator, Special Nutrition 
Programs;
    (4) Food Distribution program--Deputy Administrator, Special 
Nutrition Programs;
    (5) Supplemental Food program--Deputy Administrator, Special 
Nutrition Programs;
    (6) Management offices--Deputy Administrator, Management;
    (7) Financial Management offices--Deputy Administrator, Financial 
Management;
    (8) Appeals not covered above--Associate Administrator, FCS.


[[Page 903]]


<R03>
PARTS 296-299--[RESERVED]

<R05>

[[Page 905]]


<R02>
                              FINDING AIDS


<R03>

  --------------------------------------------------------------------

  A list of CFR titles, subtitles, chapters, subchapters and parts and 
an alphabetical list of agencies publishing in the CFR are included in 
the CFR Index and Finding Aids volume to the Code of Federal Regulations 
which is published separately and revised annually.

  Material Approved for Incorporation by Reference
  Table of CFR Titles and Chapters
  Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR
  Redesignation Table
  List of CFR Sections Affected

[[Page 907]]

            Material Approved for Incorporation by Reference

                     (Revised as of January 1, 1997)

  The Director of the Federal Register has approved under 5 U.S.C. 
552(a) and 1 CFR Part 51 the incorporation by reference of the following 
publications. This list contains only those incorporations by reference 
effective as of the revision date of this volume. Incorporations by 
reference found within a regulation are effective upon the effective 
date of that regulation. For more information on incorporation by 
reference, see the preliminary pages of this volume.


7 CFR CHAPTER III (PARTS 210-299)

FOOD AND CONSUMER SERVICE, DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                                                                   7 CFR


AOAC International

  2200 Wilson Blvd., Suite 400, Arlington, VA 
  22201-3301
Official Methods of Analysis of the AOAC            Part 210, Appendix A
  International, (formerly the Association of 
  Official Analytical Chemists), 15th Ed. (1990).


Food and Nutrition Service, Nutrition and Technical Services Division

  3101 Park Center Drive, Room 607, Alexandria, 
  Virginia 22302
Sections 5.4.1, 7.2.1 and 8.0 as described in       Part 210, Appendix A
  ``Protein Quality Evaluation, Report of the 
  Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation on Protein 
  Quality Evaluation,'' Rome, 1990, as published 
  by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) 
  of the United Nations/World Health Organization 
  (WHO).



[[Page 909]]


<R03>
                    Table of CFR Titles and Chapters


<R04>

                     (Revised as of January 1, 1997)

                      Title 1--General Provisions

         I  Administrative Committee of the Federal Register 
                (Parts 1--49)
        II  Office of the Federal Register (Parts 50--299)
        IV  Miscellaneous Agencies (Parts 400--500)

                          Title 2--[Reserved]

                        Title 3--The President

         I  Executive Office of the President (Parts 100--199)

                           Title 4--Accounts

         I  General Accounting Office (Parts 1--99)
        II  Federal Claims Collection Standards (General 
                Accounting Office--Department of Justice) (Parts 
                100--299)

                   Title 5--Administrative Personnel

         I  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1--1199)
        II  Merit Systems Protection Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  Office of Management and Budget (Parts 1300--1399)
        IV  Advisory Committee on Federal Pay (Parts 1400--1499)
         V  The International Organizations Employees Loyalty 
                Board (Parts 1500--1599)
        VI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Parts 
                1600--1699)
       VII  Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations 
                (Parts 1700--1799)
      VIII  Office of Special Counsel (Parts 1800--1899)
        IX  Appalachian Regional Commission (Parts 1900--1999)
        XI  Armed Forces Retirement Home (Part 2100)
       XIV  Federal Labor Relations Authority, General Counsel of 
                the Federal Labor Relations Authority and Federal 
                Service Impasses Panel (Parts 2400--2499)
        XV  Office of Administration, Executive Office of the 
                President (Parts 2500--2599)
       XVI  Office of Government Ethics (Parts 2600--2699)
       XXI  Department of the Treasury (Parts 3100--3199)
      XXII  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Part 3202)
     XXIII  Department of Energy (Part 3301)

[[Page 910]]

      XXIV  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (Part 3401)
      XXVI  Department of Defense (Part 3601)
    XXVIII  Department of Justice (Part 3801)
      XXIX  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 3900--3999)
       XXX  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4099)
      XXXI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 4100--4199)
    XXXIII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation (Part 4301)
      XXXV  Office of Personnel Management (Part 4501)
        XL  Interstate Commerce Commission (Part 5001)
       XLI  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Part 5101)
      XLII  Department of Labor (Part 5201)
     XLIII  National Science Foundation (Part 5301)
       XLV  Department of Health and Human Services (Part 5501)
      XLVI  Postal Rate Commission (Part 5601)
     XLVII  Federal Trade Commission (Part 5701)
    XLVIII  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Part 5801)
         L  Department of Transportation (Part 6001)
       LII  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Part 6201)
      LIII  Department of Education (Parts 6300--6399)
       LIV  Environmental Protection Agency (Part 6401)
      LVII  General Services Administration (Part 6701)
     LVIII  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Part 
                6801)
       LIX  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Part 
                6901)
        LX  United States Postal Service (Part 7001)
      LXII  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Part 7201)
     LXIII  Inter-American Foundation (Part 7301)
       LXV  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Part 
                7501)
      LXVI  National Archives and Records Administration (Part 
                7601)
      LXIX  Tennessee Valley Authority (Part 7901)
      LXXI  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Part 8101)
     LXXIV  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission (Part 
                8401)
     LXXVI  Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (Part 8601)
    LXXVII  Office of Management and Budget (Part 8701)

                          Title 6--[Reserved]

                         Title 7--Agriculture

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Agriculture 
                (Parts 0--26)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Department of 
                Agriculture
         I  Agricultural Marketing Service (Standards, 
                Inspections, Marketing Practices), Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 27--209)
        II  Food and Consumer Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 210--299)
       III  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 300--399)

[[Page 911]]

        IV  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         V  Agricultural Research Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Natural Resources Conservation Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Farm Service Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                700--799)
      VIII  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Federal Grain Inspection Service), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Fruits, Vegetables, Nuts), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 900--999)
         X  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Milk), Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1000--1199)
        XI  Agricultural Marketing Service (Marketing Agreements 
                and Orders; Miscellaneous Commodities), Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1200--1299)
       XIV  Commodity Credit Corporation, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  Foreign Agricultural Service, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Rural Telephone Bank, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  Rural Utilities Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 1700--1799)
     XVIII  Rural Housing Service, Rural Business-Cooperative 
                Service, Rural Utilities Service, and Farm Service 
                Agency, Department of Agriculture (Parts 1800--
                2099)
      XXVI  Office of Inspector General, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 2600--2699)
     XXVII  Office of Information Resources Management, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Office of Operations, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                2800--2899)
      XXIX  Office of Energy, Department of Agriculture (Parts 
                2900--2999)
       XXX  Office of Finance and Management, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3000--3099)
      XXXI  Office of Environmental Quality, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3100--3199)
     XXXII  [Reserved]
    XXXIII  Office of Transportation, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3300--3399)
     XXXIV  Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension 
                Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 3400--
                3499)
      XXXV  Rural Housing Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3500--3599)
     XXXVI  National Agricultural Statistics Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 3600--3699)

[[Page 912]]

    XXXVII  Economic Research Service, Department of Agriculture 
                (Parts 3700--3799)
   XXXVIII  World Agricultural Outlook Board, Department of 
                Agriculture (Parts 3800--3899)
       XLI  [Reserved]
      XLII  Rural Business-Cooperative Service and Rural Utilities 
                Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 4200--
                4299)

                    Title 8--Aliens and Nationality

         I  Immigration and Naturalization Service, Department of 
                Justice (Parts 1--499)

                 Title 9--Animals and Animal Products

         I  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Department 
                of Agriculture (Parts 1--199)
        II  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards 
                Administration (Packers and Stockyards Programs), 
                Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--299)
       III  Food Safety and Inspection Service, Meat and Poultry 
                Inspection, Department of Agriculture (Parts 300--
                599)

                           Title 10--Energy

         I  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Department of Energy (Parts 200--699)
       III  Department of Energy (Parts 700--999)
         X  Department of Energy (General Provisions) (Parts 
                1000--1099)
        XI  United States Enrichment Corporation (Parts 1100--
                1199)
        XV  Office of the Federal Inspector for the Alaska Natural 
                Gas Transportation System (Parts 1500--1599)
      XVII  Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board (Parts 1700--
                1799)

                      Title 11--Federal Elections

         I  Federal Election Commission (Parts 1--9099)

                      Title 12--Banks and Banking

         I  Comptroller of the Currency, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 1--199)
        II  Federal Reserve System (Parts 200--299)
       III  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Export-Import Bank of the United States (Parts 400--
                499)
         V  Office of Thrift Supervision, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Farm Credit Administration (Parts 600--699)
       VII  National Credit Union Administration (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Federal Financing Bank (Parts 800--899)

[[Page 913]]

        IX  Federal Housing Finance Board (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XIV  Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Parts 1400--
                1499)
        XV  Thrift Depositor Protection Oversight Board (Parts 
                1500--1599)
      XVII  Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                1700-1799)
     XVIII  Community Development Financial Institutions Fund, 
                Department of the Treasury (Parts 1800--1899)

               Title 13--Business Credit and Assistance

         I  Small Business Administration (Parts 1--199)
       III  Economic Development Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)

                    Title 14--Aeronautics and Space

         I  Federal Aviation Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--199)
        II  Office of the Secretary, Department of Transportation 
                (Aviation Proceedings) (Parts 200--399)
       III  Commercial Space Transportation, Federal Aviation 
                Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 400--499)
         V  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)

                 Title 15--Commerce and Foreign Trade

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Commerce (Parts 
                0--29)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Commerce and 
                Foreign Trade
         I  Bureau of the Census, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                30--199)
        II  National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Foreign-Trade Zones Board, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 400--499)
       VII  Bureau of Export Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Bureau of Economic Analysis, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 800--899)
        IX  National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 
                Department of Commerce (Parts 900--999)
        XI  Technology Administration, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
      XIII  East-West Foreign Trade Board (Parts 1300--1399)
       XIV  Minority Business Development Agency (Parts 1400--
                1499)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Foreign Trade 
                Agreements

[[Page 914]]

        XX  Office of the United States Trade Representative 
                (Parts 2000--2099)
            Subtitle D--Regulations Relating to Telecommunications 
                and Information
     XXIII  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                2300--2399)

                    Title 16--Commercial Practices

         I  Federal Trade Commission (Parts 0--999)
        II  Consumer Product Safety Commission (Parts 1000--1799)

             Title 17--Commodity and Securities Exchanges

         I  Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Parts 1--199)
        II  Securities and Exchange Commission (Parts 200--399)
        IV  Department of the Treasury (Parts 400--499)

          Title 18--Conservation of Power and Water Resources

         I  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, Department of 
                Energy (Parts 1--399)
       III  Delaware River Basin Commission (Parts 400--499)
        VI  Water Resources Council (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Susquehanna River Basin Commission (Parts 800--899)
      XIII  Tennessee Valley Authority (Parts 1300--1399)

                       Title 19--Customs Duties

         I  United States Customs Service, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 1--199)
        II  United States International Trade Commission (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  International Trade Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 300--399)

                     Title 20--Employees' Benefits

         I  Office of Workers' Compensation Programs, Department 
                of Labor (Parts 1--199)
        II  Railroad Retirement Board (Parts 200--399)
       III  Social Security Administration (Parts 400--499)
        IV  Employees' Compensation Appeals Board, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 500--599)
         V  Employment and Training Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 600--699)
        VI  Employment Standards Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 700--799)
       VII  Benefits Review Board, Department of Labor (Parts 
                800--899)
      VIII  Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries (Parts 
                900--999)

[[Page 915]]

        IX  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans' 
                Employment and Training, Department of Labor 
                (Parts 1000--1099)

                       Title 21--Food and Drugs

         I  Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1--1299)
        II  Drug Enforcement Administration, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 1300--1399)
       III  Office of National Drug Control Policy (Parts 1400--
                1499)

                      Title 22--Foreign Relations

         I  Department of State (Parts 1--199)
        II  Agency for International Development, International 
                Development Cooperation Agency (Parts 200--299)
       III  Peace Corps (Parts 300--399)
        IV  International Joint Commission, United States and 
                Canada (Parts 400--499)
         V  United States Information Agency (Parts 500--599)
        VI  United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency 
                (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Overseas Private Investment Corporation, International 
                Development Cooperation Agency (Parts 700--799)
        IX  Foreign Service Grievance Board Regulations (Parts 
                900--999)
         X  Inter-American Foundation (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  International Boundary and Water Commission, United 
                States and Mexico, United States Section (Parts 
                1100--1199)
       XII  United States International Development Cooperation 
                Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
      XIII  Board for International Broadcasting (Parts 1300--
                1399)
       XIV  Foreign Service Labor Relations Board; Federal Labor 
                Relations Authority; General Counsel of the 
                Federal Labor Relations Authority; and the Foreign 
                Service Impasse Disputes Panel (Parts 1400--1499)
        XV  African Development Foundation (Parts 1500--1599)
       XVI  Japan-United States Friendship Commission (Parts 
                1600--1699)
      XVII  United States Institute of Peace (Parts 1700--1799)

                          Title 23--Highways

         I  Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1--999)
        II  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and 
                Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
       III  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 1300--1399)

[[Page 916]]

                Title 24--Housing and Urban Development

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Housing and Urban Development (Parts 0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Housing and Urban 
                Development
         I  Office of Assistant Secretary for Equal Opportunity, 
                Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                100--199)
        II  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing-Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 200--299)
       III  Government National Mortgage Association, Department 
                of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 300--399)
         V  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Office of Assistant Secretary for Community Planning 
                and Development, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 600--699) [Reserved]
       VII  Office of the Secretary, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Housing Assistance Programs and 
                Public and Indian Housing Programs) (Parts 700--
                799)
      VIII  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Section 8 Housing Assistance 
                Programs and Section 202 Direct Loan Program) 
                (Parts 800--899)
        IX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Public and Indian 
                Housing, Department of Housing and Urban 
                Development (Parts 900--999)
         X  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Interstate Land Sales 
                Registration Program) (Parts 1700--1799)
       XII  Office of Inspector General, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 2000--2099)
        XX  Office of Assistant Secretary for Housing--Federal 
                Housing Commissioner, Department of Housing and 
                Urban Development (Parts 3200--3899)
       XXV  Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation (Parts 4100--
                4199)

                           Title 25--Indians

         I  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--299)
        II  Indian Arts and Crafts Board, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 300--399)
       III  National Indian Gaming Commission, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 500--599)
        IV  Office of Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation (Parts 
                700--799)
         V  Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior, 
                and Indian Health Service, Department of Health 
                and Human Services (Part 900)
        VI  Office of the Assistant Secretary-Indian Affairs, 
                Department of the Interior (Part 1001)

[[Page 917]]

                      Title 26--Internal Revenue

         I  Internal Revenue Service, Department of the Treasury 
                (Parts 1--799)

           Title 27--Alcohol, Tobacco Products and Firearms

         I  Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Department of 
                the Treasury (Parts 1--299)

                   Title 28--Judicial Administration

         I  Department of Justice (Parts 0--199)
       III  Federal Prison Industries, Inc., Department of Justice 
                (Parts 300--399)
         V  Bureau of Prisons, Department of Justice (Parts 500--
                599)
        VI  Offices of Independent Counsel, Department of Justice 
                (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Office of Independent Counsel (Parts 700--799)

                            Title 29--Labor

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Labor (Parts 
                0--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Labor
         I  National Labor Relations Board (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Labor-Management Programs, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 200--299)
       III  National Railroad Adjustment Board (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Labor-Management Standards, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 400--499)
         V  Wage and Hour Division, Department of Labor (Parts 
                500--899)
        IX  Construction Industry Collective Bargaining Commission 
                (Parts 900--999)
         X  National Mediation Board (Parts 1200--1299)
       XII  Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (Parts 
                1400--1499)
       XIV  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Parts 1600--
                1699)
      XVII  Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 
                Department of Labor (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2200--2499)
       XXV  Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration, 
                Department of Labor (Parts 2500--2599)
     XXVII  Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission 
                (Parts 2700--2799)
        XL  Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (Parts 4000--
                4999)

                      Title 30--Mineral Resources

         I  Mine Safety and Health Administration, Department of 
                Labor (Parts 1--199)
        II  Minerals Management Service, Department of the 
                Interior (Parts 200--299)

[[Page 918]]

       III  Board of Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Geological Survey, Department of the Interior (Parts 
                400--499)
        VI  Bureau of Mines, Department of the Interior (Parts 
                600--699)
       VII  Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, 
                Department of the Interior (Parts 700--999)

                 Title 31--Money and Finance: Treasury

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Treasury 
                (Parts 0--50)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Money and Finance
         I  Monetary Offices, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                51--199)
        II  Fiscal Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                200--399)
        IV  Secret Service, Department of the Treasury (Parts 
                400--499)
         V  Office of Foreign Assets Control, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Bureau of Engraving and Printing, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center, Department of 
                the Treasury (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of International Investment, Department of the 
                Treasury (Parts 800--899)

                      Title 32--National Defense

            Subtitle A--Department of Defense
         I  Office of the Secretary of Defense (Parts 1--399)
         V  Department of the Army (Parts 400--699)
        VI  Department of the Navy (Parts 700--799)
       VII  Department of the Air Force (Parts 800--1099)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to National 
                Defense
       XII  Defense Logistics Agency (Parts 1200--1299)
       XVI  Selective Service System (Parts 1600--1699)
       XIX  Central Intelligence Agency (Parts 1900--1999)
        XX  Information Security Oversight Office, National 
                Archives and Records Administration (Parts 2000--
                2099)
       XXI  National Security Council (Parts 2100--2199)
      XXIV  Office of Science and Technology Policy (Parts 2400--
                2499)
     XXVII  Office for Micronesian Status Negotiations (Parts 
                2700--2799)
    XXVIII  Office of the Vice President of the United States 
                (Parts 2800--2899)
      XXIX  Presidential Commission on the Assignment of Women in 
                the Armed Forces (Part 2900)

               Title 33--Navigation and Navigable Waters

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Transportation (Parts 1--
                199)
        II  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 
                200--399)

[[Page 919]]

        IV  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 400--499)

                          Title 34--Education

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary, Department of 
                Education (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Regulations of the Offices of the 
                Department of Education
         I  Office for Civil Rights, Department of Education 
                (Parts 100--199)
        II  Office of Elementary and Secondary Education, 
                Department of Education (Parts 200--299)
       III  Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative 
                Services, Department of Education (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Vocational and Adult Education, Department 
                of Education (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Bilingual Education and Minority Languages 
                Affairs, Department of Education (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Office of Postsecondary Education, Department of 
                Education (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Office of Educational Research and Improvement, 
                Department of Education (Parts 700--799)
        XI  National Institute for Literacy (Parts 1100-1199)
            Subtitle C--Regulations Relating to Education
       XII  National Council on Disability (Parts 1200--1299)

                        Title 35--Panama Canal

         I  Panama Canal Regulations (Parts 1--299)

             Title 36--Parks, Forests, and Public Property

         I  National Park Service, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
        II  Forest Service, Department of Agriculture (Parts 200--
                299)
       III  Corps of Engineers, Department of the Army (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  American Battle Monuments Commission (Parts 400--499)
         V  Smithsonian Institution (Parts 500--599)
       VII  Library of Congress (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (Parts 800--
                899)
        IX  Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation (Parts 
                900--999)
        XI  Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance 
                Board (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  National Archives and Records Administration (Parts 
                1200--1299)
       XIV  Assassination Records Review Board (Parts 1400-1499)

             Title 37--Patents, Trademarks, and Copyrights

         I  Patent and Trademark Office, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 1--199)
        II  Copyright Office, Library of Congress (Parts 200--299)

[[Page 920]]

        IV  Assistant Secretary for Technology Policy, Department 
                of Commerce (Parts 400--499)
         V  Under Secretary for Technology, Department of Commerce 
                (Parts 500--599)

           Title 38--Pensions, Bonuses, and Veterans' Relief

         I  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 0--99)

                       Title 39--Postal Service

         I  United States Postal Service (Parts 1--999)
       III  Postal Rate Commission (Parts 3000--3099)

                  Title 40--Protection of Environment

         I  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1--799)
         V  Council on Environmental Quality (Parts 1500--1599)

          Title 41--Public Contracts and Property Management

            Subtitle B--Other Provisions Relating to Public 
                Contracts
        50  Public Contracts, Department of Labor (Parts 50-1--50-
                999)
        51  Committee for Purchase From People Who Are Blind or 
                Severely Disabled (Parts 51-1--51-99)
        60  Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Equal 
                Employment Opportunity, Department of Labor (Parts 
                60-1--60-999)
        61  Office of the Assistant Secretary for Veterans 
                Employment and Training, Department of Labor 
                (Parts 61-1--61-999)
            Subtitle C--Federal Property Management Regulations 
                System
       101  Federal Property Management Regulations (Parts 101-1--
                101-99)
       105  General Services Administration (Parts 105-1--105-999)
       109  Department of Energy Property Management Regulations 
                (Parts 109-1--109-99)
       114  Department of the Interior (Parts 114-1--114-99)
       115  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 115-1--115-99)
       128  Department of Justice (Parts 128-1--128-99)
            Subtitle D--Other Provisions Relating to Property 
                Management [Reserved]
            Subtitle E--Federal Information Resources Management 
                Regulations System
       201  Federal Information Resources Management Regulation 
                (Parts 201-1--201-99) [Reserved]
            Subtitle F--Federal Travel Regulation System
       301  Travel Allowances (Parts 301-1--301-99)
       302  Relocation Allowances (Parts 302-1--302-99)
       303  Payment of Expenses Connected with the Death of 
                Certain Employees (Parts 303-1--303-2)
       304  Payment from a Non-Federal Source for Travel Expenses 
                (Parts 304-1--304-99)

[[Page 921]]

                        Title 42--Public Health

         I  Public Health Service, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 1--199)
        IV  Health Care Financing Administration, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 400--499)
         V  Office of Inspector General-Health Care, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1000--1999)

                   Title 43--Public Lands: Interior

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of the Interior 
                (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Lands
         I  Bureau of Reclamation, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 200--499)
        II  Bureau of Land Management, Department of the Interior 
                (Parts 1000--9999)
       III  Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation 
                Commission (Parts 10000--10005)

             Title 44--Emergency Management and Assistance

         I  Federal Emergency Management Agency (Parts 0--399)
        IV  Department of Commerce and Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 400--499)

                       Title 45--Public Welfare

            Subtitle A--Department of Health and Human Services, 
                General Administration (Parts 1--199)
            Subtitle B--Regulations Relating to Public Welfare
        II  Office of Family Assistance (Assistance Programs), 
                Administration for Children and Families, 
                Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 
                200--299)
       III  Office of Child Support Enforcement (Child Support 
                Enforcement Program), Administration for Children 
                and Families, Department of Health and Human 
                Services (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Office of Refugee Resettlement, Administration for 
                Children and Families Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 400--499)
         V  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the United 
                States, Department of Justice (Parts 500--599)
        VI  National Science Foundation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  Commission on Civil Rights (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 800--899)
         X  Office of Community Services, Administration for 
                Children and Families, Department of Health and 
                Human Services (Parts 1000--1099)
        XI  National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities 
                (Parts 1100--1199)
       XII  ACTION (Parts 1200--1299)
      XIII  Office of Human Development Services, Department of 
                Health and Human Services (Parts 1300--1399)

[[Page 922]]

       XVI  Legal Services Corporation (Parts 1600--1699)
      XVII  National Commission on Libraries and Information 
                Science (Parts 1700--1799)
     XVIII  Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation (Parts 1800--
                1899)
       XXI  Commission on Fine Arts (Parts 2100--2199)
      XXII  Christopher Columbus Quincentenary Jubilee Commission 
                (Parts 2200--2299)
     XXIII  Arctic Research Commission (Part 2301)
      XXIV  James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation (Parts 
                2400--2499)
       XXV  Corporation for National and Community Service (Parts 
                2500--2599)

                          Title 46--Shipping

         I  Coast Guard, Department of Transportation (Parts 1--
                199)
        II  Maritime Administration, Department of Transportation 
                (Parts 200--399)
        IV  Federal Maritime Commission (Parts 500--599)

                      Title 47--Telecommunication

         I  Federal Communications Commission (Parts 0--199)
        II  Office of Science and Technology Policy and National 
                Security Council (Parts 200--299)
       III  National Telecommunications and Information 
                Administration, Department of Commerce (Parts 
                300--399)

           Title 48--Federal Acquisition Regulations System

         1  Federal Acquisition Regulation (Parts 1--99)
         2  Department of Defense (Parts 200--299)
         3  Department of Health and Human Services (Parts 300--
                399)
         4  Department of Agriculture (Parts 400--499)
         5  General Services Administration (Parts 500--599)
         6  Department of State (Parts 600--699)
         7  Agency for International Development (Parts 700--799)
         8  Department of Veterans Affairs (Parts 800--899)
         9  Department of Energy (Parts 900--999)
        10  Department of the Treasury (Parts 1000--1099)
        12  Department of Transportation (Parts 1200--1299)
        13  Department of Commerce (Parts 1300--1399)
        14  Department of the Interior (Parts 1400--1499)
        15  Environmental Protection Agency (Parts 1500--1599)
        16  Office of Personnel Management Federal Employees 
                Health Benefits Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                1600--1699)
        17  Office of Personnel Management (Parts 1700--1799)
        18  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Parts 
                1800--1899)

[[Page 923]]

        19  United States Information Agency (Parts 1900--1999)
        20  Nuclear Regulatory Commission (Parts 2000--2099)
        21  Office of Personnel Management, Federal Employees 
                Group Life Insurance Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation (Parts 2100--2199)
        23  Social Security Administration (Parts 2300--2399)
        24  Department of Housing and Urban Development (Parts 
                2400--2499)
        25  National Science Foundation (Parts 2500--2599)
        28  Department of Justice (Parts 2800--2899)
        29  Department of Labor (Parts 2900--2999)
        34  Department of Education Acquisition Regulation (Parts 
                3400--3499)
        35  Panama Canal Commission (Parts 3500--3599)
        44  Federal Emergency Management Agency (Parts 4400--4499)
        51  Department of the Army Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5100--5199)
        52  Department of the Navy Acquisition Regulations (Parts 
                5200--5299)
        53  Department of the Air Force Federal Acquisition 
                Regulation Supplement (Parts 5300--5399)
        54  Defense Logistics Agency, Department of Defense (Part 
                5452)
        57  African Development Foundation (Parts 5700--5799)
        61  General Services Administration Board of Contract 
                Appeals (Parts 6100--6199)
        63  Department of Transportation Board of Contract Appeals 
                (Parts 6300--6399)
        99  Cost Accounting Standards Board, Office of Federal 
                Procurement Policy, Office of Management and 
                Budget (Parts 9900--9999)

                       Title 49--Transportation

            Subtitle A--Office of the Secretary of Transportation 
                (Parts 1--99)
            Subtitle B--Other Regulations Relating to 
                Transportation
         I  Research and Special Programs Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 100--199)
        II  Federal Railroad Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 200--299)
       III  Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 300--399)
        IV  Coast Guard, Department of Transportation (Parts 400--
                499)
         V  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 
                Department of Transportation (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Federal Transit Administration, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 600--699)
       VII  National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK) 
                (Parts 700--799)
      VIII  National Transportation Safety Board (Parts 800--999)

[[Page 924]]

         X  Surface Transportation Board, Department of 
                Transportation (Parts 1000--1399)

                   Title 50--Wildlife and Fisheries

         I  United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of 
                the Interior (Parts 1--199)
        II  National Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 200--299)
       III  International Fishing and Related Activities (Parts 
                300--399)
        IV  Joint Regulations (United States Fish and Wildlife 
                Service, Department of the Interior and National 
                Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and 
                Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce); Endangered Species Committee 
                Regulations (Parts 400--499)
         V  Marine Mammal Commission (Parts 500--599)
        VI  Fishery Conservation and Management, National Oceanic 
                and Atmospheric Administration, Department of 
                Commerce (Parts 600--699)

                      CFR Index and Finding Aids

            Subject/Agency Index
            List of Agency Prepared Indexes
            Parallel Tables of Statutory Authorities and Rules
            Acts Requiring Publication in the Federal Register
            List of CFR Titles, Chapters, Subchapters, and Parts
            Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR



[[Page 925]]




<R03>
           Alphabetical List of Agencies Appearing in the CFR


<R04>

                     (Revised as of January 1, 1997)

                                                  CFR Title, Subtitle or
                     Agency                               Chapter

ACTION                                            45, XII
Administrative Committee of the Federal Register  1, I
Advanced Research Projects Agency                 32, I
Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental          5, VII
     Relations
Advisory Committee on Federal Pay                 5, IV
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation         36, VIII
African Development Foundation                    22, XV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 57
Agency for International Development              22, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
Agricultural Marketing Service                    7, I, IX, X, XI
Agricultural Research Service                     7, V
Agriculture Department
  Agricultural Marketing Service                  7, I, IX, X, XI
  Agricultural Research Service                   7, V
  Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service      7, III; 9, I
  Commodity Credit Corporation                    7, XIV
  Cooperative State Research, Education, and      7, XXXIV
       Extension Service
  Economic Research Service                       7, XXXVII
  Energy, Office of                               7, XXIX
  Environmental Quality, Office of                7, XXXI
  Farm Service Agency                             7, VII, XVIII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 4
  Federal Crop Insurance Corporation              7, IV
  Finance and Management, Office of               7, XXX
  Food and Consumer Service                       7, II
  Food Safety and Inspection Service              9, III
  Foreign Agricultural Service                    7, XV
  Forest Service                                  36, II
  Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards        7, VIII; 9, II
       Administration
  Information Resources Management, Office of     7, XXVII
  Inspector General, Office of                    7, XXVI
  National Agricultural Library                   7, XLI
  National Agricultural Statistics Service        7, XXXVI
  Natural Resources Conservation Service          7, VI
  Operations, Office of                           7, XXVIII
  Rural Business-Cooperative Service              7, XVIII, XLII
  Rural Development Administration                7, XLII
  Rural Housing Service                           7, XVIII, XXXV
  Rural Telephone Bank                            7, XVI
  Rural Utilities Service                         7, XVII, XVIII, XLII
  Secretary of Agriculture, Office of             7, Subtitle A
  Transportation, Office of                       7, XXXIII
  World Agricultural Outlook Board                7, XXXVIII
Air Force Department                              32, VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement       48, 53
Alaska Natural Gas Transportation System, Office  10, XV
     of the Federal Inspector
Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Bureau of          27, I
AMTRAK                                            49, VII
American Battle Monuments Commission              36, IV
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service        7, III; 9, I

[[Page 926]]

Appalachian Regional Commission                   5, IX
Architectural and Transportation Barriers         36, XI
     Compliance Board
Arctic Research Commission                        45, XXIII
Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, United       22, VI
     States
Army Department                                   32, V
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 51
Assassination Records Review Board                36, XIV
Benefits Review Board                             20, VII
Bilingual Education and Minority Languages        34, V
     Affairs, Office of
Blind or Severely Disabled, Committee for         41, 51
     Purchase From People Who Are
Board for International Broadcasting              22, XIII
Census Bureau                                     15, I
Central Intelligence Agency                       32, XIX
Child Support Enforcement, Office of              45, III
Children and Families, Administration for         45, II, III, IV, X
Christopher Columbus Quincentenary Jubilee        45, XXII
     Commission
Civil Rights, Commission on                       45, VII
Civil Rights, Office for                          34, I
Coast Guard                                       33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
Commerce Department                               44, IV
  Census Bureau                                   15, I`
  Economic Affairs, Under Secretary               37, V
  Economic Analysis, Bureau of                    15, VIII
  Economic Development Administration             13, III
  Emergency Management and Assistance             44, IV
  Export Administration, Bureau of                15, VII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 13
  Fishery Conservation and Management             50, VI
  Foreign-Trade Zones Board                       15, IV
  International Trade Administration              15, III; 19, III
  National Institute of Standards and Technology  15, II
  National Marine Fisheries Service               50, II, IV
  National Oceanic and Atmospheric                15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
       Administration                             VI
  National Telecommunications and Information     15, XXIII; 47, III
       Administration
  National Weather Service                        15, IX
  Patent and Trademark Office                     37, I
  Productivity, Technology and Innovation,        37, IV
       Assistant Secretary for
  Secretary of Commerce, Office of                15, Subtitle A
  Technology, Under Secretary for                 37, V
  Technology Administration                       15, XI
  Technology Policy, Assistant Secretary for      37, IV
Commercial Space Transportation                   14, III
Commodity Credit Corporation                      7, XIV
Commodity Futures Trading Commission              5, XLI; 17, I
Community Planning and Development, Office of     24, V, VI
     Assistant Secretary for
Community Services, Office of                     45, X
Comptroller of the Currency                       12, I
Construction Industry Collective Bargaining       29, IX
     Commission
Consumer Product Safety Commission                5, LXXI; 16, II
Cooperative State Research, Education, and        7, XXXIV
     Extension Service
Copyright Office                                  37, II
Cost Accounting Standards Board                   48, 99
Council on Environmental Quality                  40, V
Customs Service, United States                    19, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Department                                5, XXVI; 32, Subtitle A
  Advanced Research Projects Agency               32, I
  Air Force Department                            32, VII
  Army Department                                 32, V; 33, II; 36, III, 
                                                  48, 51
  Defense Intelligence Agency                     32, I

[[Page 927]]

  Defense Logistics Agency                        32, I, XII; 48, 54
  Defense Mapping Agency                          32, I
  Engineers, Corps of                             33, II; 36, III
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 2
  Navy Department                                 32, VI; 48, 52
  Secretary of Defense, Office of                 32, I
Defense Contract Audit Agency                     32, I
Defense Intelligence Agency                       32, I
Defense Logistics Agency                          32, XII; 48, 54
Defense Mapping Agency                            32, I
Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board           10, XVII
Delaware River Basin Commission                   18, III
Drug Enforcement Administration                   21, II
East-West Foreign Trade Board                     15, XIII
Economic Affairs, Under Secretary                 37, V
Economic Analysis, Bureau of                      15, VIII
Economic Development Administration               13, III
Economic Research Service                         7, XXXVII
Education, Department of                          5, LIII
  Bilingual Education and Minority Languages      34, V
       Affairs, Office of
  Civil Rights, Office for                        34, I
  Educational Research and Improvement, Office    34, VII
       of
  Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of   34, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 34
  Postsecondary Education, Office of              34, VI
  Secretary of Education, Office of               34, Subtitle A
  Special Education and Rehabilitative Services,  34, III
       Office of
  Vocational and Adult Education, Office of       34, IV
Educational Research and Improvement, Office of   34, VII
Elementary and Secondary Education, Office of     34, II
Employees' Compensation Appeals Board             20, IV
Employees Loyalty Board                           5, V
Employment and Training Administration            20, V
Employment Standards Administration               20, VI
Endangered Species Committee                      50, IV
Energy, Department of                             5, XXIII; 10, II, III, X
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 9
  Federal Energy Regulatory Commission            5, XXIV; 18, I
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 109
Energy, Office of                                 7, XXIX
Engineers, Corps of                               33, II; 36, III
Engraving and Printing, Bureau of                 31, VI
Enrichment Corporation, United States             10, XI
Environmental Protection Agency                   5, LIV; 40, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 15
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 115
Environmental Quality, Office of                  7, XXXI
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission           5, LXII; 29, XIV
Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant Secretary  24, I
     for
Executive Office of the President                 3, I
  Administration, Office of                       5, XV
  Environmental Quality, Council on               40, V
  Management and Budget, Office of                25, III, LXXVII; 48, 99
  National Drug Control Policy, Office of         21, III
  National Security Council                       32, XXI; 47, 2
  Presidential Documents                          3
  Science and Technology Policy, Office of        32, XXIV; 47, II
  Trade Representative, Office of the United      15, XX
       States
Export Administration, Bureau of                  15, VII
Export-Import Bank of the United States           5, LII; 12, IV
Family Assistance, Office of                      45, II
Farm Credit Administration                        5, XXXI; 12, VI
Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation          5, XXX; 12, XIV
Farm Service Agency                               7, VII, XVIII
Federal Acquisition Regulation                    48, 1
Federal Aviation Administration                   14, I

[[Page 928]]

  Commercial Space Transportation                 14, III
Federal Claims Collection Standards               4, II
Federal Communications Commission                 5, XXIX; 47, I
Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office of   41, 60
Federal Crop Insurance Corporation                7, IV
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation             5, XXII; 12, III
Federal Election Commission                       11, I
Federal Emergency Management Agency               44, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 44
Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal    48, 21
     Acquisition Regulation
Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition     48, 16
     Regulation
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission              5, XXIV; 18, I
Federal Financial Institutions Examination        12, XI
     Council
Federal Financing Bank                            12, VIII
Federal Highway Administration                    23, I, II; 49, III
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation            1, IV
Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight Office       12, XVII
Federal Housing Finance Board                     12, IX
Federal Inspector for the Alaska Natural Gas      10, XV
     Transportation System, Office of
Federal Labor Relations Authority, and General    5, XIV; 22, XIV
     Counsel of the Federal Labor Relations 
     Authority
Federal Law Enforcement Training Center           31, VII
Federal Maritime Commission                       46, IV
Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service        29, XII
Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission  5, LXXIV; 29, XXVII
Federal Pay, Advisory Committee on                5, IV
Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                   28, III
Federal Procurement Policy Office                 48, 99
Federal Property Management Regulations           41, 101
Federal Property Management Regulations System    41, Subtitle C
Federal Railroad Administration                   49, II
Federal Register, Administrative Committee of     1, I
Federal Register, Office of                       1, II
Federal Reserve System                            12, II
  Board of Governors                              5, LVIII
Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board        5, VI, LXXVI
Federal Service Impasses Panel                    5, XIV
Federal Trade Commission                          5, XLVII; 16, I
Federal Transit Administration                    49, VI
Federal Travel Regulation System                  41, Subtitle F
Finance and Management, Office of                 7, XXX
Fine Arts, Commission on                          45, XXI
Fiscal Service                                    31, II
Fish and Wildlife Service, United States          50, I, IV
Fishery Conservation and Management               50, VI
Food and Drug Administration                      21, I
Food and Consumer Service                         7, II
Food Safety and Inspection Service                9, III
Foreign Agricultural Service                      7, XV
Foreign Assets Control, Office of                 31, V
Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the       45, V
     United States
Foreign Service Grievance Board                   22, IX
Foreign Service Impasse Disputes Panel            22, XIV
Foreign Service Labor Relations Board             22, XIV
Foreign-Trade Zones Board                         15, IV
Forest Service                                    36, II
General Accounting Office                         4, I, II
General Services Administration                   5, LVII
  Contract Appeals, Board of                      48, 61
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 5
  Federal Property Management Regulations System  41, 101, 105
  Federal Travel Regulation System                41, Subtitle F
  Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel    41, 304
       Expenses
  Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death    41, 303
     of Certain Employees
[[Page 929]]

  Relocation Allowances                           41, 302
  Travel Allowances                               41, 301
Geological Survey                                 30, IV
Government Ethics, Office of                      5, XVI
Government National Mortgage Association          24, III
Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards          7, VIII; 9, II
     Administration
Great Lakes Pilotage                              46, III
Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation            45, XVIII
Health and Human Services, Department of          5, XLV; 45, Subtitle A
  Child Support Enforcement, Office of            45, III
  Children and Families, Administration for       45, II, III, IV, X
  Community Services, Office of                   45, X
  Family Assistance, Office of                    45, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 3
  Food and Drug Administration                    21, I
  Health Care Financing Administration            42, IV
  Human Development Services, Office of           45, XIII
  Indian Health Service                           25, V
  Inspector General (Health Care), Office of      42, V
  Public Health Service                           42, I
  Refugee Resettlement, Office of                 45, IV
Health Care Financing Administration              42, IV
Housing and Urban Development, Department of      5, LXV; 24, Subtitle B
  Community Planning and Development, Office of   24, V, VI
       Assistant Secretary for
  Equal Opportunity, Office of Assistant          24, I
       Secretary for
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 24
  Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, Office    12, XVII
       of
  Government National Mortgage Association        24, III
  Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office   24, II, VIII, X, XX
       of Assistant Secretary for
  Inspector General, Office of                    24, XII
  Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant  24, IX
       Secretary for
  Secretary, Office of                            24, Subtitle A, VII
Housing--Federal Housing Commissioner, Office of  24, II, VIII, X, XX
     Assistant Secretary for
Human Development Services, Office of             45, XIII
Immigration and Naturalization Service            8, I
Independent Counsel, Office of                    28, VII
Indian Affairs, Bureau of                         25, I, V
Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant           25, VI
     Secretary
Indian Arts and Crafts Board                      25, II
Indian Health Service                             25, V
Information Agency, United States                 22, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 19
Information Resources Management, Office of       7, XXVII
Information Security Oversight Office, National   32, XX
     Archives and Records Administration
Inspector General
  Agriculture Department                          7, XXVI
  Health and Human Services Department            42, V
  Housing and Urban Development Department        24, XII
Institute of Peace, United States                 22, XVII
Inter-American Foundation                         5, LXIII; 22, X
Intergovernmental Relations, Advisory Commission  5, VII
     on
Interior Department
  Endangered Species Committee                    50, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 14
  Federal Property Management Regulations System  41, 114
  Fish and Wildlife Service, United States        50, I, IV
  Geological Survey                               30, IV
  Indian Affairs, Bureau of                       25, I, V
  Indian Affairs, Office of the Assistant         25, VI
       Secretary
  Indian Arts and Crafts Board                    25, II
  Land Management, Bureau of                      43, II
  Minerals Management Service                     30, II
  Mines, Bureau of                                30, VI

[[Page 930]]

  National Indian Gaming Commission               25, III
  National Park Service                           36, I
  Reclamation, Bureau of                          43, I
  Secretary of the Interior, Office of            43, Subtitle A
  Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, Board   30, III
       of
  Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,     30, VII
       Office of
Internal Revenue Service                          26, I
International Boundary and Water Commission,      22, XI
     United States and Mexico, United States 
     Section
International Development, Agency for             22, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 7
International Development Cooperation Agency,     22, XII
     United States
  International Development, Agency for           22, II; 48, 7
  Overseas Private Investment Corporation         5, XXXIII; 22, VII
International Fishing and Related Activities      50, III
International Investment, Office of               31, VIII
International Joint Commission, United States     22, IV
     and Canada
International Organizations Employees Loyalty     5, V
     Board
International Trade Administration                15, III; 19, III
International Trade Commission, United States     19, II
Interstate Commerce Commission                    5, XL
James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation      45, XXIV
Japan-United States Friendship Commission         22, XVI
Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries       20, VIII
Justice Department                                5, XXVIII; 28, I
  Drug Enforcement Administration                 21, II
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 28
  Federal Claims Collection Standards             4, II
  Federal Prison Industries, Inc.                 28, III
  Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the     45, V
       United States
  Immigration and Naturalization Service          8, I
  Offices of Independent Counsel                  28, VI
  Prisons, Bureau of                              28, V
  Property Management Regulations                 41, 128
Labor Department                                  5, XLII
  Benefits Review Board                           20, VII
  Employees' Compensation Appeals Board           20, IV
  Employment and Training Administration          20, V
  Employment Standards Administration             20, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 29
  Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Office    41, 60
       of
  Federal Procurement Regulations System          41, 50
  Labor-Management Relations and Cooperative      29, II
       Programs, Bureau of
  Labor-Management Programs, Office of            29, IV
  Mine Safety and Health Administration           30, I
  Occupational Safety and Health Administration   29, XVII
  Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration     29, XXV
  Public Contracts                                41, 50
  Secretary of Labor, Office of                   29, Subtitle A
  Veterans' Employment and Training, Office of    41, 61; 20, IX
       the Assistant Secretary for
  Wage and Hour Division                          29, V
  Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of       20, I
Labor-Management Relations and Cooperative        29, II
     Programs, Bureau of
Labor-Management Programs, Office of              29, IV
Land Management, Bureau of                        43, II
Legal Services Corporation                        45, XVI
Library of Congress                               36, VII
  Copyright Office                                37, II
Management and Budget, Office of                  5, III, LXXVII; 48, 99
Marine Mammal Commission                          50, V
Maritime Administration                           46, II
Merit Systems Protection Board                    5, II

[[Page 931]]

Micronesian Status Negotiations, Office for       32, XXVII
Mine Safety and Health Administration             30, I
Minerals Management Service                       30, II
Mines, Bureau of                                  30, VI
Minority Business Development Agency              15, XIV
Miscellaneous Agencies                            1, IV
Monetary Offices                                  31, I
National Aeronautics and Space Administration     5, LIX; 14, V
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 18
National Agricultural Library                     7, XLI
National Agricultural Statistics Service          7, XXXVI
National Archives and Records Administration      5, LXVI; 36, XII
  Information Security Oversight Office           32, XX
National Bureau of Standards                      15, II
National Capital Planning Commission              1, IV
National Commission for Employment Policy         1, IV
National Commission on Libraries and Information  45, XVII
     Science
National and Community Service, Corporation for   45, XXV
National Council on Disability                    34, XII
National Credit Union Administration              12, VII
National Drug Control Policy, Office of           21, III
National Foundation on the Arts and the           45, XI
     Humanities
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration    23, II, III; 49, V
National Indian Gaming Commission                 25, III
National Institute for Literacy                   34, XI
National Institute of Standards and Technology    15, II
National Labor Relations Board                    29, I
National Marine Fisheries Service                 50, II, IV
National Mediation Board                          29, X
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration   15, IX; 50, II, III, IV, 
                                                  VI
National Park Service                             36, I
National Railroad Adjustment Board                29, III
National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK)  49, VII
National Science Foundation                       5, XLIII; 45, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 25
National Security Council                         32, XXI
National Security Council and Office of Science   47, II
     and Technology Policy
National Telecommunications and Information       15, XXIII; 47, III
     Administration
National Transportation Safety Board              49, VIII
National Weather Service                          15, IX
Natural Resources Conservation Service            7, VI
Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation, Office of      25, IV
Navy Department                                   32, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 52
Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation             24, XXV
Nuclear Regulatory Commission                     5, XLVIII; 10, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 20
Occupational Safety and Health Administration     29, XVII
Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission  29, XX
Offices of Independent Counsel                    28, VI
Operations Office                                 7, XXVIII
Overseas Private Investment Corporation           5, XXXIII; 22, VII
Panama Canal Commission                           48, 35
Panama Canal Regulations                          35, I
Patent and Trademark Office                       37, I
Payment From a Non-Federal Source for Travel      41, 304
     Expenses
Payment of Expenses Connected With the Death of   41, 303
     Certain Employees
Peace Corps                                       22, III
Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation       36, IX
Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration       29, XXV
Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation              29, XL
Personnel Management, Office of                   5, I, XXXV; 45, VIII
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 17
  Federal Employees Group Life Insurance Federal  48, 21
     Acquisition Regulation
[[Page 932]]

  Federal Employees Health Benefits Acquisition   48, 16
       Regulation
Postal Rate Commission                            5, XLVI; 39, III
Postal Service, United States                     5, LX; 39, I
Postsecondary Education, Office of                34, VI
President's Commission on White House             1, IV
     Fellowships
Presidential Commission on the Assignment of      32, XXIX
     Women in the Armed Forces
Presidential Documents                            3
Prisons, Bureau of                                28, V
Productivity, Technology and Innovation,          37, IV
     Assistant Secretary
Public Contracts, Department of Labor             41, 50
Public and Indian Housing, Office of Assistant    24, IX
     Secretary for
Public Health Service                             42, I
Railroad Retirement Board                         20, II
Reclamation, Bureau of                            43, I
Refugee Resettlement, Office of                   45, IV
Regional Action Planning Commissions              13, V
Relocation Allowances                             41, 302
Research and Special Programs Administration      49, I
Rural Business-Cooperative Service                7, XVIII, XLII
Rural Development Administration                  7, XLII
Rural Housing Service                             7, XVIII, XXXV
Rural Telephone Bank                              7, XVI
Rural Utilities Service                           7, XVII, XVIII, XLII
Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation     33, IV
Science and Technology Policy, Office of          32, XXIV
Science and Technology Policy, Office of, and     47, II
     National Security Council
Secret Service                                    31, IV
Securities and Exchange Commission                17, II
Selective Service System                          32, XVI
Small Business Administration                     13, I
Smithsonian Institution                           36, V
Social Security Administration                    20, III; 48, 23
Soldiers' and Airmen's Home, United States        5, XI
Special Counsel, Office of                        5, VIII
Special Education and Rehabilitative Services,    34, III
     Office of
State Department                                  22, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 6
Surface Mining and Reclamation Appeals, Board of  30, III
Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement,       30, VII
     Office of
Surface Transportation Board                      49, X
Susquehanna River Basin Commission                18, VIII
Technology Administration                         15, XI
Technology Policy, Assistant Secretary for        37, IV
Technology, Under Secretary for                   37, V
Tennessee Valley Authority                        5, LXIX; 18, XIII
Thrift Depositor Protection Oversight Board       12, XV
Thrift Supervision Office, Department of the      12, V
     Treasury
Trade Representative, United States, Office of    15, XX
Transportation, Department of                     5, L
  Coast Guard                                     33, I; 46, I; 49, IV
  Commercial Space Transportation                 14, III
  Contract Appeals, Board of                      48, 63
  Emergency Management and Assistance             44, IV
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 12
  Federal Aviation Administration                 14, I
  Federal Highway Administration                  23, I, II; 49, III
  Federal Railroad Administration                 49, II
  Federal Transit Administration                  49, VI
  Maritime Administration                         46, II
  National Highway Traffic Safety Administration  23, II, III; 49, V
  Research and Special Programs Administration    49, I
  Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation   33, IV
  Secretary of Transportation, Office of          14, II; 49, Subtitle A
  Surface Transportation Board                    49, X

[[Page 933]]

Transportation, Office of                         7, XXXIII
Travel Allowances                                 41, 301
Treasury Department                               5, XXI; 17, IV
  Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Bureau of        27, I
  Community Development Financial Institutions    12, XVIII
       Fund
  Comptroller of the Currency                     12, I
  Customs Service, United States                  19, I
  Engraving and Printing, Bureau of               31, VI
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 10
  Federal Law Enforcement Training Center         31, VII
  Fiscal Service                                  31, II
  Foreign Assets Control, Office of               31, V
  Internal Revenue Service                        26, I
  International Investment, Office of             31, VIII
  Monetary Offices                                31, I
  Secret Service                                  31, IV
  Secretary of the Treasury, Office of            31, Subtitle A
  Thrift Supervision, Office of                   12, V
Truman, Harry S. Scholarship Foundation           45, XVIII
United States and Canada, International Joint     22, IV
     Commission
United States and Mexico, International Boundary  22, XI
     and Water Commission, United States Section
United States Enrichment Corporation              10, XI
Utah Reclamation Mitigation and Conservation      43, III
     Commission
Veterans Affairs Department                       38, I
  Federal Acquisition Regulation                  48, 8
Veterans' Employment and Training, Office of the  41, 61; 20, IX
     Assistant Secretary for
Vice President of the United States, Office of    32, XXVIII
Vocational and Adult Education, Office of         34, IV
Wage and Hour Division                            29, V
Water Resources Council                           18, VI
Workers' Compensation Programs, Office of         20, I
World Agricultural Outlook Board                  7, XXXVIII

[[Page 935]]

                                     

                                     


<R03>
                           Redesignation Table

<R04>


                           Redesignation Table                          
------------------------------------------------------------------------
             Previous Part 210                      1986 Part 210       
------------------------------------------------------------------------
210.1                                                                   
  210.1(a)................................  210.1(a)                    
  210.1(b)................................  210.1(a)                    
  210.1(c)................................  210.1(a), (b)               
210.2                                                                   
  210.2(a), (b)...........................  210.2                       
  210.2(b-1)..............................  210.18(g)                   
  210.2(b-2)..............................  210.18(g)                   
  210.2(b-3)..............................  210.18(g)                   
  210.2(b-4)..............................  210.18(g)                   
  210.2(c)................................  210.2                       
  210.2(c-1)-(c-2)........................  210.2                       
  210.2(c-3)..............................  210.11                      
  210.2(d)................................  deleted                     
  210.2(e)-(h)............................  210.2                       
  210.2(h-1)..............................  210.11                      
  210.2(h-2), (h-3).......................  210.2                       
  210.2(h-4), (h-5).......................  210.10(a)                   
  210.2(h-6)..............................  210.18(g)                   
  210.2(h-7), (h-8).......................  210.2                       
  210.2(h-9)..............................  deleted                     
  210.2(i)................................  210.10(d), (i)              
  210.2(i-1)-(k)..........................  210.2                       
  210.2(l)................................  deleted                     
  210.2(l-1)..............................  210.2                       
  210.2(m)................................  deleted                     
  210.2(n)-(q)............................  210.2                       
  210.2(q-1)..............................  deleted                     
  210.2(q-2)..............................  210.18(g)                   
  210.2(r)-(w)............................  210.2                       
210.3                                                                   
  210.3(a)................................  210.3(a)                    
  210.3(b)................................  210.3(b)                    
  210.3(b) proviso........................  210.3(c)                    
  210.3(b-1)..............................  210.3(b), (c)               
  210.3(b-2)..............................  deleted                     
  210.3(c)................................  210.3(b)                    
210.4                                                                   
  210.4(a)................................  210.4(a), (b)               
  210.4(b)................................  210.4(a), (c)               
  210.4(c)................................  210.4(b)                    
  210.4(d)................................  210.4(b)                    
210.5                                                                   
  210.5(a)................................  210.5(a)                    
  210.5(b)................................  210.5(c)                    
  210.5(c)................................  210.5(b)                    
210.5a                                                                  
  210.5a..................................  deleted                     
210.6                                                                   
  210.6(a)................................  210.17(a)                   
  210.6(b)................................  210.17(b)                   
  210.6(c)................................  210.17(c)                   
  210.6(d)................................  210.17(d)                   
  210.6(e)................................  210.17(e)                   
  210.6(f)................................  210.17(h)                   
  210.6(g)................................  210.17(g)                   
  210.6(h)................................  210.17(f)                   
210.7                                                                   
  210.7(a)................................  210.6                       
  210.7(b)................................  210.14(a)                   
  210.7(c)................................  210.25                      
  210.7(d)................................  210.25                      
210.8                                                                   
  210.8(a)................................  210.9(a)                    
  210.8(b)................................  210.9(a)                    
  210.8(c)................................  deleted                     
  210.8(d)................................  deleted                     
  210.8(e)................................  210.9(b)                    
  210.8(e)(1).............................  210.9(b)(1), 210.14(a)      
  210.8(e)(2).............................  210.9(b)(2), 210.14(b)      
  210.8(e)(3).............................  210.9(b)(5), 210.10(b), (g) 
  210.8(e)(4).............................  210.9(b)(6), 210.10(b)      
  210.8(e)(5).............................  210.9(b)(7), 210.23(a)      
  210.8(e)(6).............................  210.9(b)(11), 210.23(b)     
  210.8(e)(7).............................  210.9(b)(8), 210.7(a)       
  210.8(e)(8).............................  210.9(b)(9), 210.8(a)       
  210.8(e)(9).............................  210.9(b)(13), 210.13(a)     
  210.8(e)(10)............................  deleted                     
  210.8(e)(11)............................  210.9(b)(14), 210.14(d)     
  210.8(e)(12)............................  210.9(b)(15), 210.13(b)     
  210.8(e)(13)............................  210.9(b)(3), 210.14(c)      
  210.8(e)(14)............................  210.9(b)(16), 210.19(d),    
                                             210.23(c)                  
  210.8(e)(15)............................  210.9(b)(10), 210.23(b)     
  210.8(e)(16)............................  210.9(b)(18)                
  210.8(e)(17)............................  210.9(b)(12), 210.14(d)     
  210.8(e)(18)............................  210.9(b)(17)                
  210.8(f)................................  210.19(e)                   
210.8a                                                                  
  210.8a(a)...............................  210.16(a), (c)              
  210.8a(b)...............................  210.16(c)                   
  210.8a(c)...............................  210.16(a)                   
  210.8a(d)...............................  210.16(d)                   
  210.8a(e)...............................  210.16(b)                   
  210.8a(f)...............................  210.16(a)                   
210.9                                                                   
  210.9...................................  210.23(a)                   
210.9a                                                                  
  210.9a(a)...............................  210.12(a)                   
  210.9a(b)...............................  210.12(a)                   
  210.9a(c)...............................  210.12(b)                   
  210.9a(d)...............................  210.12(c)                   
  210.9a(e)...............................  210.12(d)                   
210.10                                                                  
  210.10(a)(1)............................  210.10(c)                   
  210.10(a)(2)............................  210.10(b), (c)              
  210.10(a)(2)(i).........................  210.10(d)(1)                
  210.10(a)(2)(ii)........................  210.10(d)(2)                
  210.10(a)(2)(iii).......................  210.10(d)(3)                
  210.10(a)(2)(iv)........................  210.10(d)(4)                

[[Page 936]]

                                                                        
  210.10(a)(3)............................  210.10(g)                   
  210.10(a)(4)............................  210.10(c)                   
  210.10(a)(5)............................  210.10(e)                   
  210.10(a)(6)............................  210.10(f)                   
  210.10(b)...............................  210.10(h)                   
  210.10(c)...............................  210.10(i)(6)                
  210.10(d)...............................  210.10(i)(6)                
  210.10(e)...............................  210.10(i)(6)                
  210.10(f)...............................  210.10(i)(3)                
  210.10(g)...............................  210.10(i)(1)                
  210.10(h)...............................  210.10(i)(2)                
  210.10(i)...............................  210.10(i)(4)                
  210.10(j)...............................  210.10(i)(5)                
210.11                                                                  
  210.11(a)...............................  210.7(a), 210.10(b)         
  210.11(b)...............................  210.7(b)                    
  210.11(c)...............................  210.7(b)                    
  210.11(d)...............................  deleted                     
  210.11(e)...............................  210.7(b)                    
210.12                                                                  
  210.12..................................  210.7(a)                    
210.13                                                                  
  210.13(a)...............................  210.8(a)                    
  210.13(b)...............................  210.8(a), (b)               
  210.13(b-1).............................  210.8(b), 210.15(b)(1)      
  210.13(c)...............................  210.8(c)                    
210.14                                                                  
  210.14(a)(1)............................  210.19(a)                   
  210.14(a)(2)............................  210.18(f), 210.19(a), 210.23
  210.14(a)(3)............................  210.18(g), (i)              
  210.14(a)(4)............................  210.18(j)                   
  210.14(a)(5)............................  210.18(h)                   
  210.14(a)(6)............................  210.18(k)                   
  210.14(a)(7)............................  210.18(f)                   
  210.14(a-1).............................  210.14(c), 210.19(a)        
  210.14(a-2).............................  deleted                     
  210.14(a-3).............................  deleted                     
  210.14(b)...............................  210.18(d)                   
  210.14(c)...............................  210.18(d)                   
  210.14(d)...............................  210.19(b)                   
  210.14(e)...............................  deleted                     
  210.14(f)...............................  210.18(c)                   
  210.14(g)...............................  210.5(d), 210.17(g),        
                                             210.18(1), 210.23(c)       
  210.14(h)...............................  210.18(e)                   
  210.14(i)...............................  210.18(a)                   
210.15                                                                  
  210.15..................................  210.18(b)                   
210.15b                                                                 
  210.15b(a)..............................  210.11                      
  210.15b(b)..............................  Appendix B                  
210.16                                                                  
  210.16(a), (b), (c), (e), (f), (h), (i).  210.19(c)                   
  210.16(d)...............................  210.19(c), 210.23           
  210.16(g)...............................  deleted                     
210.17                                                                  
  210.17(a)...............................  210.22(a), (c)              
  210.17(b), (c)..........................  deleted                     
  210.17(d), (e), (f).....................  210.19(d)                   
210.18                                                                  
  210.18..................................  210.26                      
210.19                                                                  
  210.19..................................  210.24                      
210.19a                                                                 
  210.19a(a), (b), (c)....................  210.21(a), (b), (c)         
210.20                                                                  
  210.20(a)...............................  210.27(a), (c)              
  210.20(b)...............................  210.27(a), (b)              
  210.20(c)...............................  210.27(a)                   
  210.20(d)...............................  210.27(d)                   
  210.20(d-1).............................  210.27(e)                   
  210.20(d-2).............................  210.27(f)                   
  210.20(e)...............................  210.27(g)                   
210.21                                                                  
  210.21..................................  210.28                      
210.22                                                                  
  210.22..................................  210.29                      
------------------------------------------------------------------------


[[Page 937]]


<R03>
List of CFR Sections Affected

<R04>

All changes in this volume of the Code of Federal Regulations which were 
made by documents published in the Federal Register since January 1, 
1986, are enumerated in the following list. Entries indicate the nature 
of the changes effected. Page numbers refer to Federal Register pages. 
The user should consult the entries for chapters and parts as well as 
sections for revisions.
For the period before January 1, 1986, see the ``List of CFR Sections 
Affected 1949-1963, 1964-1972, and 1973-1985'', published in seven 
separate volumes.

                                  1986

7 CFR
                                                                   51 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter II
210  Revised; interim..............................................34874
210.4  (b)(1) corrected............................................41295
210.5  (d)(1) corrected............................................41295
210.10  (a)(2)(ii)(A) redesignated as (a)(2)(ii)(A)(1); 
        (a)(2)(ii)(A)(2) added; table revised......................16809
    (a)(2)(ii)(A)(2) and table corrected...........................23515
210.16  (a)(3) corrected...........................................41295
210.19  (b) corrected..............................................41295
210.25  (a) and (b) corrected......................................41295
210.27  (g) corrected..............................................41295
210  Appendix A corrected..........................................41295
225  Existing regulations unchanged................................39737
225.8  (a)(8) amended...............................................3325
225.10  (b) removed; (c), (d), and (e) redesignated as (b), (c), 
        and (d).....................................................3325
225.11  (c)(4) and (e) amended......................................3325
225.12  (a) amended.................................................3325
225.16  (c)(8) amended..............................................3325
225.18  (b)(7) through (9) removed; (c) through (i) redesignated 
        as (d) through (j); new (c) added...........................3325
225.19  (d) amended.................................................3325
225.20  (b)(2) and (3) revised; (c)(5) added.......................16810
    (b)(2) table corrected.........................................23515
226.2  Amended.....................................................31316
226.6  (o) added...................................................31316
    (k) introductory text amended; (k)(1) through (3) added........42992
226.8  (a), (b), (c), and (d) revised...............................4295
226.20  (a)(2)(ii) redesignated as (a)(2)(ii)(A); (a)(2)(ii)(B) 
        added; (a)(3)(ii), (c)(2) and (3) revised..................16811
    (a)(2)(ii)(B) and (c) (2) table and (3) table corrected........23515
235  Nomenclature change...........................................27151
235.2  (b) revised; (n) added; (p-1) removed.......................27151
235.4  (c), (d), and (e) removed; (f), (g), and (h) redesignated 
        as (c), (d), and (e).......................................27151
    (a) and (b)(3) introductory text revised; (b) introductory 
text, (1), (2), and (4) amended....................................33862
235.5  Revised.....................................................27151
235.6  (a) and (a-1) redesignated as (a-1) and (a-2); new (a) 
        added; (b) and (c) amended.................................27152
235.7  (b) amended.................................................27152
235.11  (a) amended................................................27152
    (b)(1) and (5)(vi) amended.....................................33862
246.10  (c)(4)(i), (5)(i), and (6)(i) revised......................13208
    (c)(4)(i) corrected............................................16155
247  Authority citation revised....................................11008
247.2  Amended; interim............................................32900
247.5  (a) introductory text and (c) revised; (a)(15) and (16) 
        added; interim.............................................32900

[[Page 938]]

247.7  (a)(1) and (2), (b)(2) introductory text and (i) through 
        (iv), and (g) revised; (a)(3) and (4) redesignated as 
        (a)(4) and (5); (a)(3) and (b)(2)(v) added; interim........32901
247.10  (b)(1) revised; (b)(3) amended.............................11008
    Revised; interim...............................................32901
250  Authority citation revised....................................23725
250.3  Amended.....................................................23725
250.4  (a) amended.................................................12823
250.6  (j)(2) amended..............................................12823
    (n) and (s) revised; (w) removed...............................23725
250.11  Added; interim.............................................23518
250.15  Revised....................................................23725
251  Revised.......................................................12823
252  Revised; interim..............................................23518
271  Authority citation revised; section authority citations 
        removed....................................................10782
    Authority citation revised.....................................42994
271.2  Amended.....................................................6513,
7203, 10782, 18749
    Amended; eff. 1-30-87..........................................47390
271.5  (c) amended.................................................10782
271.6  (b)(1)(i), (iii), and (vi) amended..........................10782
271.7  (e)(2)(ii) amendment confirmed..............................10782
272  Authority citation added; section authority citations removed
                                                                   10782
    Authority citation revised.....................................42994
272.1  (g)(72) added................................................6514
    (c)(1) revised; (c)(2) redesignated as (c)(3); new (c)(2) and 
(g)(70) added.......................................................7203
    (f) and (g)(7) heading amended; (g)(73) added..................10782
    (a) heading revised; (b) heading removed; (b) text transferred 
to (a); new (b) and (g)(74) added..................................11011
    (g)(70) corrected..............................................12307
    (g)(75) added..................................................16284
    (g)(76) added..................................................18750
    (g)(77) added; interim.........................................20794
    (g)(78) added; interim.........................................28200
    (g)(79) added..................................................30048
    (g)(81) added..................................................42994
    (g)(82) added; eff. 1-30-87....................................47390
272.2  (a)(2) amended; (d)(1)(iv) added.............................7204
    (a)(2) and (c)(3)(ii) amended; (d)(1)(v) added; eff. 1-30-87 
                                                                   47390
272.3  (c) (5) and (6) redesignated as (c) (6) and (7); new (c)(5) 
        added......................................................18750
    (a)(1)(ix) amended; (a)(1)(x) added; eff. 1-30-87..............47390
272.7  (i) amended.................................................10782
    (c) amended....................................................16284
272.8  Added........................................................7204
273  Authority citation revised; section authority citations 
        removed....................................................10782
    Authority citation revised.....................................42994
273.1  (f)(2)(i) amended............................................6514
    (a) and (b) revised; (c)(1), (f)(1)(ii), (2)(ii), and (4)(ii) 
amended............................................................10782
    (c)(1) corrected...............................................18753
    (b)(2)(vii) added; (d) text designated as (d)(1); (d)(2) 
added; eff. 1-30-87................................................47390
273.2  (b), (f)(4)(ii), and (i)(4)(i)(B) amended; (f)(1)(v), 
        (4)(iv), and (9) revised....................................7206
    (c) (3) and (4), (e)(2), (f)(1)(ii)(A), (B), (C), and (E), 
(2)(ii)(A), (3)(i), (5)(ii), (i)(4)(iii)(B), and (k)(1)(iii)(B)(1) 
amended; (f)(1)(viii) and (i)(4)(iii)(C) added; (f)(2)(i), 
(i)(3)(i), and (j)(1)(i) revised...................................10783
    (i)(1) and (3)(iii) revisions, (i)(4)(i) amendment, (j)(1)(ii) 
removal, and (j)(1)(iii), (iv), and (v) redesignation as 
(j)(1)(ii), (iii), and (iv) confirmed; new (j)(1)(iv) amended......10783
    (i)(4)(i)(B) correctly designated..............................12307
    (b), (f)(1)(vi), (viii)(A)(1), (2), (3), and (4), and 
(i)(4)(i)(B) amended; (f)(1)(viii)(A)(5) added.....................18750
    (l) added; interim.............................................20794
    (j) introductory text and (1) heading revised; (j)(1)(iv) 
amended; (j) (2) and (3) redesignated as (j) (3) and (4); new 
(j)(2) added; new (j)(3)(i) introductory text, (ii), and (4), and 
(k) introductory text amended; interim.............................28201
    (f)(1)(viii)(A)(2) and (j)(1)(iv) corrected....................30049

[[Page 939]]

273.3  Amended..............................................10785, 18750
273.4  (a)(4), (b), and (c) revised; (a)(5) removed; (a)(6), (7), 
        and (8) redesignated as (a)(5), (6), and (7); new (a)(7) 
        and (d) amended............................................10785
273.5  (b)(1)(iii) and (iv) revision, (b)(1)(v) addition, (b)(3) 
        and (4) removal, and (b)(5) redesignation as (b)(3) 
        confirmed; new (b)(3) revised..............................10785
    (b)(1)(vi) added...............................................18750
    (a) amended....................................................30048
273.6  Revised......................................................7206
273.7  (b)(1)(vii), (f) introductory text, (h)(1)(iv), and (2), 
        (n)(1)(i) and (v), and (4)(i) amended......................10785
    (n)(1)(v) amendment effective date corrected...................18753
    (b)(1)(ii) amended.............................................30048
    (h)(1)(v) and (2) removed; (h)(1) introductory text and (i) 
through (iv) redesignated as (h) introductory text and (1) through 
(4); Heading, (a), (b)(2)(i), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g)(1), new 
(h)(2), (i)(1), and (1)(iv), (n)(1)(iv) revised; (b)(1) (i) and 
(iii), new (h) introductory text, (3), and (4), (m), and (n) 
introductory text and (1)(vi) amended; (n)(5), (o), and (p) added; 
eff. 1-30-87.......................................................47391
273.8  (a) amendment, (c)(1) revision, and (c)(3) addition 
        confirmed; (e)(4), (5), and (11) introductory text, and 
        (h)(2) amended; (e)(11)(x) added; (h)(1)(iv) removed; 
        (h)(1)(v) and (vi) redesignated as (h)(1)(iv) and (v); new 
        (h)(1)(v) amended; (j) revised.............................10785
    (b) and (i)(4) amended.........................................11011
    (i)(4) corrected...............................................18753
    (a) amended; interim...........................................28202
    (h)(4)(iii) amended; eff. 1-30-87..............................47397
273.9  (a) introductory text, (1), and (2) revision, (a)(3)(i) and 
        (ii) amendments, and (b)(4) addition confirmed.............10786
    (a)(3) introductory text, (b)(1)(i) and (iv), (2)(i), 
(c)(1)(ii), and (5) introductory text amended; (c)(10)(x) added; 
(d)(7)(i) and (ii) and (8)(i) and (ii) removed; (d)(7)(iii) and 
(iv) and (8)(iii) and (iv) redesignated as (d)(7)(i) and (ii) and 
(8)(i) and (ii); new (d)(7)(i) and (8)(i) revised..................10786
    (d) (2), (4), and (5) amended..................................11011
    (d)(6) (ii) through (vii) redesignated as (d)(6) (iii) through 
(viii); (d)(6)(i) redesignated in part as new (d)(6)(ii); 
remaining (d)(6)(i), new (ii) and (vii) amended; new (d)(6)(v) 
introductory text and (B) revised..................................18750
    (a) introductory text amended; interim.........................28202
    (c)(1)(iv), (5)(ii) introductory text, (B), and (C) added; 
(c)(5) introductory text last sentence and second sentence 
redesignated as (c)(5)(i) introductory text and (ii)(A); (c)(5) 
(i) through (v) redesignated as (c)(5)(i) (A) through (E); (c) 
(3), (4), and new (5)(i)(D) amended................................30048
    (d)(4) amended.................................................42994
273.10  (e)(1)(i)(A) amended........................................6514
    (a)(1)(ii) and (iii) introductory text, (e)(2)(i)(C), (iv), 
(vi)(A) and (B), and (f)(3) amendments and (a)(1)(iii)(C), 
(e)(2)(ii)(B) and (C), (iii) introductory text, (3) introductory 
text, (i) introductory text, and (ii), and (f)(2) revisions 
confirmed..........................................................10786
    (e)(3)(vi) and (g)(1)(i)(B) removals, (e)(3)(vii) and (viii) 
and (g)(1)(i)(C) and (D) redesignation as (e)(3)(vi) and (vii) and 
(g)(1)(i)(B) and (C); and new (e)(3)(vi) amendment confirmed; 
(a)(1)(ii), (e)(2)(i)(A) and (ii)(A)(2), and (3)(v) amended; 
(a)(2) revised.....................................................10786
    (e)(1)(i) (B), (E), and (G) amended............................11012
    (e)(4)(i) revised..............................................16285
    (d)(6) and (f)(7) added........................................18751

[[Page 940]]

    (d)(7) added; (g)(1)(ii) amended; interim......................28202
    (e)(1)(i)(E) amended...........................................42994
273.11  (a)(2)(iii) and (e)(1) amended..............................6514
    (a)(2)(iii), (b)(1) introductory text and (iii), (c)(1) 
heading, introductory text, (i), and (ii), (c)(2) introductory 
text, (i), (ii), (iii), and (iv), (3) introductory text, (d)(1), 
and (e)(6) amended; (c) heading and introductory text, (2) 
heading, and (3)(ii) revised; (d)(3) added.........................10787
    (h) redesignation as (i) and new (h) addition confirmed........10787
    (h)(2)(i), (3)(i), (4), (5)(i) introductory text, (B), and 
(F), (ii), (6), and (8)(iv) revised; (h)(2)(ii) through (vi) 
redesignated as (h)(2)(iii) through (vii); new (h)(2)(ii) added; 
new (h)(2)(iv), (5)(i)(A), and (8)(iii)(A), (i)(2)(iii), and (j) 
introductory text amended; new (h)(2)(iii) and (vii) revised.......10787
    (a)(2)(iii), (4)(ii)(C), (b)(1)(iii), (c)(2)(iii), and (h)(2) 
(i) and (ii) amended...............................................11012
    (a)(1)(i) amended..............................................18751
    (h)(2)(ii) corrected...........................................18753
273.12  (a)(1)(i), (c)(1)(i) and (iii), and (d) amended; (c)(2), 
        (e) introductory text, (2), (3), and (4) revised; 
        (e)(1)(ii), (5), and (6) added.............................10789
    (a)(1)(v) amended..............................................11012
273.13  (a)(3) revision confirmed; (a)(3)(ii), (iii), (iv), and 
        (v) and (b) introductory text revised; (b)(12) and (13) 
        added......................................................10790
273.14  Revised....................................................10791
273.15  (e) amended................................................10793
273.16  (e)(1), (6), (9)(ii), and (10)(i) and (g)(3) amended.......10793
273.18  (d)(4)(ii) and (g)(3) amended..............................10793
    (a) introductory text and (f) revised..........................18751
273.20  (a) amended................................................10793
273.21  (a)(1), (b)(2), (d)(2), (h)(2)(ii), and (j)(1) 
        introductory text amended; (h)(3)(iii) removed; (h)(3)(iv) 
        redesignated as (h)(3)(iii)................................10793
    (a) introductory text and (3) amended; (b) (1) and (2) 
revised; (c) (3) through (5) redesignated as (c) (4) through (6); 
(a)(4) and new (c)(3) added........................................18751
273.22  (b)(6), (c)(7), (f)(2)(xiii) and (6)(iii)(A), and 
        (g)(4)(ii)(B) amended; (d)(5) heading, (6) heading, and 
        (7) heading removed; (g)(1) heading added..................10793
274  Authority citation revised; section authority citations 
        removed....................................................10782
    Authority citation revised.....................................42994
274.1  (a) revised.................................................18752
274.10  (d)(1) amended..............................................6514
275  Authority citation revised; section authority citations 
        removed....................................................10782
    Authority citation revised.....................................42994
275.8  (b)(2)(xii) revised.........................................10793
275.12  (c) introductory text amended...............................7207
276  Authority citation revised; section authority citations 
        removed....................................................10782
    Authority citation revised.....................................42994
276.7  (j) amended.................................................18752
277  Authority citation revised; section authority citations 
        removed....................................................10782
    Authority citation revised.....................................42994
277.4  (b)(9) added; eff. 1-30-87..................................47397
278  Authority citation revised; section authority citations 
        removed....................................................10782
    Authority citation revised.....................................42994
278.1  (e) amended..................................................6514
278.5  (a)(1) amended...............................................6514
    (a) (1) and (3) amended; interim...............................12498
278.9  (c) added....................................................6514
    (d) added; interim.............................................12498
279  Authority citation revised; section authority citations 
        removed....................................................10782
    Authority citation revised.....................................42994
279.10  (d) revised................................................18752

[[Page 941]]

279.11  Existing text designated as (a); (b) added.................18752
280  Authority citation revised; section authority citations 
        removed....................................................10782
    Authority citation revised.....................................42994
281  Authority citation revised; section authority citations 
        removed....................................................10782
    Authority citation revised.....................................42994
282  Authority citation revised; section authority citations 
        removed....................................................10782
    Authority citation revised.....................................42994
284  Authority citation revised; section authority citations 
        removed....................................................10782
    Authority citation revised.....................................42994
285  Authority citation revised; section authority citations 
        removed....................................................10782
    Authority citation revised.....................................42994
285.2  (a) amended.................................................18752
285.3  (b)(1) amended..............................................18752

                                  1987

7 CFR
                                                                   52 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter II
210.2  Amended...............................................7560, 30128
210.10  (c) table, (d)(1), and (i)(6) (i) and (ii) amended..........9110
210.14  (a) amended................................................15298
210.16  (a) introductory text revised..............................11187
210.18  (f)(6) and (7) amended; (f)(8) and (m) added; (l) revised 
                                                                    5736
210.20  (a)(5) and (b)(7) and (8) amended; (a)(6) redesignated as 
        (a)(7); new (a)(6) added....................................5737
215.1  Revised; interim.............................................7562
215.2  (k-1) added; (v)(1) amened...................................7560
    (x-1) added; interim............................................7562
    (k-1), (bb) and (cc) removed; (v)(1) amended...................30128
215.7  (a) revised; interim.........................................7562
    (d)(1) amended.................................................15298
220.2  (j-1) added; (u)(1) revised..................................7560
    (j-1), (bb) and (cc) removed; (u)(1) amended...................30128
220.7  (e)(1)(ii) amended; (e)(1) (iii) and (iv) redesignated as 
        (e)(1) (iv) and (v); new (e)(1)(iii) added.................15298
225  Authority citation revised....................................15298
225.19  (j) amended................................................15298
226  Authority citation revised....................................5526,
15298, 36906, 48968
226.2  Amended; interim............................................36906
226.4  (b) (1) through (3) and (5) through (9) amended; interim....36906
226.6  (j) introductory text amended................................5526
    (b)(2) and (e)(7) amended; interim.............................36906
    (o) amended....................................................48968
226.8  (g) added....................................................5526
226.9  (b)(1) amended; interim.....................................36907
226.11  (c)(1) amended; interim....................................36907
226.15  (j) added..................................................15298
    (e) (2) and (3) amended; interim...............................36907
226.17  (b)(7) amended; interim....................................36907
226.18  (e)(3) amended; interim....................................36907
226.19  (b)(9)(i) revised; interim.................................36907
226.23  (c)(2), (d), (e)(1) (i), (ii) introductory text and (F), 
        (iii), and (h)(5) amended; (e)(1)(ii) (D) and (G), (iii), 
        (2)(iii) and (vii) and (h)(2) revised; interim.............36907
227.5  (a) revised..................................................8223
240  Authority citation revised.....................................7267
240.1  (b) amended..................................................7267
240.3  (a) amended..................................................7267
245.2  (a-1), (a-2), and (a-3) redesignated as (a-2), (a-3), and 
        (a-4); (a-1) and (b-1) added; (a-4) (3) and (4) amended; 
        (k) revised; interim.......................................19274
    Comment time extended..........................................27669
245.5  (a)(1) (iii), (iv), and (vi) revised; interim...............19275
    Comment time extended..........................................27669
245.6  (a) introductory text and (1) amended; interim..............19275
    Comment time extended..........................................27669
245.6a  (a)(1) and (b)(3) amended; (a) (2) and (3) revised; 
        interim....................................................19275

[[Page 942]]

    Comment time extended..........................................27669
245.11  (a)(2) amended; interim....................................19276
    Comment time extended..........................................27669
246  Authority citation revised....................................21236
246.2  Amended.....................................................25189
246.3  (d) and (e) redesignated as (e) and (f); new (d) added; new 
        (e)(3) amended.............................................21236
246.4  (a)(8) and (b) revised; (a)(18) added.......................21236
246.7  (h)(8) revised; (i)(7) redesignated as (i)(8); 
        (c)(2)(iv)(L) and new (i)(7) added.........................21236
246.9  (a), (c) and (k)(3) revised.................................21237
246.12  (f)(2)(xx) added; (k)(2) amended...........................21237
246.14  (b) revised; (c)(1) introductory text amended..............21237
246.16  (b), (c)(2) and (d) revised; (c)(3) added..................21237
    (c), (d) and (e) redesignated as (d), (e) and (f); new (c) 
added; (b)(2) introductory text and new (e) and (f) revised........25190
246.23  (a) heading and (b) heading revised; (c) redesignated as 
        (d); new (c) added.........................................21238
246.25  (b) revised................................................21238
250  Authority citation revised.............................17932, 42633
250.3  Amended; interim............................................24976
250.4  (a) revised.................................................17932
250.6  (r)(4) amended; interim.....................................24976
    (j)(2) amended.................................................42633
250.15  (f) introductory text and (1) through (3), (m)(2) and (n) 
        (2), (3) and (4) and (o) introductory text and (1) through 
        (6) redesignated as (f)(1) introductory text and (i) 
        through (iii), (m)(3), (n) (3), (4) and (5) and (o)(1) 
        introductory text and (i) through (vi); new (f)(1)(iii) 
        revised; new (f) (2), (3), (4) and (5), (m)(2), (n)(2) and 
        (o)(2) added; interim......................................24976
251  Authority citation revised....................................42634
251.2  (c) revised.................................................17933
251.4  (g) and (h) redesignated as (h) and (i); new (g) and (j) 
        added......................................................17933
    (d) amended; OMB number........................................42634
251.6  (a) revised.................................................17934
251.9  Redesignated as 251.10 and (d) removed and (e), (f), and 
        (g) redesignated as (d), (e), and (f); new 251.9 added.....17934
251.10  Redesignated from 251.9; (d) removed; (e), (f), and (g) 
        redesignated as (d), (e), and (f)..........................17934
252.2  Amended; interim............................................24977
252.3  (c) revised; interim........................................24978
252.4  (b) revised; interim........................................16369
    (c) (6) and (7) amended; (c)(9)(ii) redesignated as 
(c)(9)(iii); new (c)(9)(ii) added; interim.........................24978
271  Authority citation revised....................................11814
271.2  Amended.........................................3406, 7556, 13222
    Amendment confirmed; amended...................................11814
    Amended; interim...............................................36397
272  Authority citation revised....................................11814
272.1  (g)(83) added; interim.......................................1299
    (d)(1) amended; (d)(2) revised; (g)(71) added...................3406
    (g)(77) and (g)(76)(iii) corrected..............................3411
    (g)(84) added...................................................5436
    (g)(85) added; eff. to 9-30-90..................................7557
    (g)(86) added..................................................11022
    (g)(72) addition confirmed; (g)(87) added......................11814
    (g)(88) added; interim.........................................20058
    (g)(87) correctly designated; (g)(89) added; interim...........20379
    Technical correction...........................................22888
    (g)(90) added; interim.........................................26941
    (g)(91) added; interim.........................................29658
    (g)(92) added (effective date pending).........................35225
    (g)(93) added; interim.........................................36397
    (g)(83) addition confirmed; (g)(94) added......................36564
272.2  (a)(2) amended...............................................3407
    (a)(2) amended; (d)(1)(vi) and (e)(8) added....................35225
272.5  (a) and (b) introductory text amended; (c) added; interim 
                                                                   36398
272.9  Added; eff. to 9-30-90.......................................7557
272.10  Added......................................................35226
273  Authority citation revised....................................11814
273.1  (e)(5) and (f)(4)(iv) added; eff. to 9-30-90.................7557

[[Page 943]]

    (e) amended; (f)(2)(i) amendment confirmed.....................11814
    (a)(2)(i) (C) and (D) amended; interim.........................36398
273.2  (i)(3)(i) revised; (i)(3)(ii) amended; interim...............1299
    (b)(1)(vii) corrected...........................................1300
    (d)(2) revised; (f)(1)(ix) added; (f)(3)(ii) amended............3407
    (j)(2)(i) and (k) introductory text corrected; (l) correctly 
designated..........................................................3411
    (f)(1)(ii) (A) and (B) amended; (f)(1)(ii) (D), (E), and (F) 
redesignated as (f)(1)(ii) (E), (F), and (G); new (f)(1)(ii)(D) 
added; interim.....................................................20058
    (f)(2) introductory text and (i), (3)(i) introductory text, 
(A) and (B) redesignated as (f)(2)(i) and (f)(1)(ix), (f)(3) 
introductory text, (i) and (ii); (f)(3)(ii) removed; new 
(f)(2)(i), (3) introductory text and (i) amended; interim..........26941
    (i)(1) revised; interim........................................36398
    (i)(3)(i) revision confirmed; (i)(3)(ii) revised...............36564
273.4  (a) (2), (3), (4), and (5) amended; (a) (8) through (11) 
        added; interim.............................................20058
    (a)(9) corrected...............................................22888
273.7  (b)(2)(i), (g)(2) introductory text, (i), (iii), and (iv) 
        and (o)(6) heading amended; (g)(2)(ii) revised; (h)(5) 
        added......................................................11022
273.8  (e)(11)(xi) added; interim..................................20379
    Technical correction...........................................22888
    (e)(15) and (h)(1)(vi) added; interim..........................26941
273.9  (d)(6)(i) and (v)(B) amended; (d)(6)(ii) revised.............5436
    (c) (3), (4) and (5)(ii)(B) amended; (c)(10)(xi) added.........20379
    Technical correction...........................................22888
    (b)(1)(v) and (c)(12) added; interim...........................26941
    (a)(3) introductory text, (d)(7)(i) and (8)(i) revised; 
(b)(2)(i) amended; (c)(1) (ii), (iii), and (iv) redesignated as 
(c)(1) (iii), (iv), and (v); new (c)(1)(ii) added; new 
(c)(1)(iv)(B) revised; eff. in part 7-1-88 and 10-1-88; eff. in 
part to 10-30-89; interim..........................................36399
273.10  (d)(1)(i) amended; (d)(6) revised...........................5436
    (e)(2)(iii)(B)(8) and (9) removed..............................11022
    (e)(1)(i)(A) amendment confirmed...............................11814
    (f) (2) through (7) redesignated as (f) (3) through (8); new 
(f)(2) added; interim..............................................36399
273.11  (h), (i), and (j) redesignated as (i), (j), and (k); new 
        (h) added; eff. to 9-30-90..................................7557
    (a)(2)(iii) and (e)(1) revised.................................11814
273.18  (c)(2)(ii) amended; interim................................36400
274  Authority citation revised....................................11814
274.10  (e), (f), (g), and (h) redesignated as (f), (g), (h), and 
        (i); new (e) added; new (i) amended; eff. to 9-30-90........7557
    (d)(1) amendment confirmed.....................................11815
275.1  (a) amended; (b) revised.....................................3407
275.2  (a)(2) revised...............................................3407
275.3  (a), (b), (c) introductory text and (1) heading and 
        introductory text revised; (c)(2) removed; (c) (3), (4), 
        and (5) redesignated as (c) (2), (3), and (4); new (c)(2) 
        revised; (c)(5) added.......................................3407
275.5  (b) revised; (c) removed.....................................3408
275.6  (a) amended..................................................3408
275.7  (b) and (e) revised; (f) removed.............................3408
275.8  Revised......................................................3408
275.9  (a), (b), and (c) revised; (d), (e), and (f) removed; (g) 
        redesignated as (d) and amended.............................3409
275.11  (b)(1)(ii) table amended; (f)(2) (ii) and (iii) 
        redesignated as (f)(2) (iii) and (iv); new (f)(2)(ii) 
        added.......................................................3409
275.12  (d)(2)(v) and (f)(3) added; interim........................29658

[[Page 944]]

275.15  (a) (2), (3) and (d) removed; (a)(1), (e), (f), and (g) 
        redesignated as (a), (d), (e), and (f)......................3409
275.16  (a) amended; (b) and (d) revised............................3409
275.17  (a) revised; (c) and (d) added..............................3409
275.20  Revised.....................................................3410
275.21  (c) and (d) amended.........................................3410
275.22  Removed; new 275.22 redesignated from 275.23................3410
275.23  Redesignated as 275.22; new 275.23 redesignated from 
        275.25 and (a)(1) and (d)(1)(i) and (2) amended.............3410
    (e)(7) added...................................................29659
275.25  Redesignated as 275.23 and (a)(1) and (d)(1)(i) and (2) 
        amended.....................................................3410
276.2  (a) and (d) amended; (e) added; interim.....................26941
276.4  (d) introductory text and (2) amended........................3410
277.18  (a)(2) revised; (c) removed; (d) through (h) redesignated 
        as (c) through (g).........................................35227
277  Appendix A amended; interim...................................36400
278  Authority citation revised....................................11814
278.1  (c)(4) amended; (c)(5) and (h) through (q) redesignated as 
        (c)(6) and (i) through (r); new (c)(5) and (h) added; eff. 
        to 9-30-90..................................................7557
    (e) amended....................................................11815
    (b)(4)(ii) amended; (o), (p), (q), and (r) redesignated as 
(p), (q), (r), and (s); new (o) added; new (r) revised.............13222
278.2  (a), (b), (c), (d), (g), and (h) amended; new (l) added; 
        eff. to 9-30-90.............................................7557
278.3  (a) amended; eff. to 9-30-90.................................7558
278.4  (c) amended; eff. to 9-30-90.................................7558
278.5  (a)(1) amendment confirmed..................................11815
    (a) (1) and (3) amendment confirmed............................18198
278.6  (e)(2) (iii) and (iv) and (3) (iii) and (v) amended; eff. 
        to 9-30-90..................................................7558
    (f) text redesignated as (f)(1); (f) (2), (3), and (4) added 
                                                                   13222
278.9  (e) added; eff. to 9-30-90...................................7558
    (c) addition confirmed.........................................11815
    (f) added......................................................13223
    (d) addition confirmed.........................................18198

                                  1988

7 CFR
                                                                   53 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter II
210.1--210.3 (Subpart A)  Revised..................................29147
210.4--210.8 (Subpart B)  Revised..................................29150
210.9--210.16 (Subpart C)  Revised.................................29152
210.10  (h) revised................................................25308
    (h) introductory text corrected................................48632
210.16  (d) amended.................................................4379
210.17--210.20 (Subpart D)  Revised................................29157
210.21--210.23 (Subpart E)  Revised................................29162
210.24--210.29 (Subpart F)  Revised................................29162
210.27  (c) revised; interim.......................................27475
210  Appendixes A, B, and C revision at 51 FR 34890 confirmed; 
        Appendixes A and C amended.................................29164
220.8  (b)(2) revised..............................................25308
    (b)(2) introductory text corrected.............................48632
225  Authority citation revised.....................................4829
225.2  Amended......................................................4829
225.5  (a) revised..................................................4829
225.7  (j) introductory text amended; (j)(6) added..................4829
225.8  (b) (1) and (7) amended......................................4830
225.9  (e)(1)(i) revised; (e)(8) amended............................4830
225.11  (b)(1)(i), (c) (1) and (4), and (e) amended.................4830
225.14  (c) amended.................................................4830
225.16  (e) (3) and (13) amended....................................4830
225.18  (c)(1) amended..............................................4830
225.19  (d) amended.................................................4830
225.20  (a)(5) revised..............................................4830
225.21  (a) and (c) amended; (b)(2) and (d) revised.................4830

[[Page 945]]

225.23  (a), (b), (d), and (e) amended..............................4831
226  Authority citation revised; section authority citations 
        removed....................................................52587
226.1  Revised; interim............................................52587
226.2  Amended; interim............................................52587
226.4  (b) introductory text revised; (b) (1), (2), (3), (5), (6), 
        (7), (8), and (9) and (g)(2) amended; interim..............52588
226.6  (b) (2), (7), and (8), (c)(11), and (d) heading revised; 
        (e) through (o) redesignated as (f) through (p); new (e) 
        added; new (f)(7) revised; (c) introductory text, (5) and 
        (6), (d)(3), new (f)(8), (g), (h), (i)(1), (k)(9), (l) (1) 
        and (3), and (p) amended; interim..........................52589
226.7  (b)(2), (i), (k), and (m)(1) amended; (l) revised; interim 
                                                                   52589
226.8  (a) amended; interim........................................52590
226.9  (b)(1) revised; (b)(2) amended; interim.....................52590
226.10  (c) amended; interim.......................................52590
226.11  Heading, (b), and (c) revised; (a) amended; interim........52590
226.12  (b) concluding text amended; interim.......................52590
226.14  (a) amended; interim.......................................52590
226.15  (a), (e)(3) and (11)(ii), and (g) amended; (b) (1), (4) 
        and (6) and (e) (2) and (4) revised; interim...............52590
226.16  (b) introductory text, (1), (2) and (3), (c), (d) 
        introductory text, (1) and (2), (e) (1) and (2), (h), and 
        (i) amended; (d)(4)(i), (f), and (j) revised; interim......52591
226.17  (b)(7) amended; interim....................................52591
226.19a  Added; interim............................................52591
226.20  (b) revised................................................25308
    (b) introductory text and (4) table corrected..................48632
    (c) revised; (h) and (j) amended; (p) added; interim...........52592
226.21  (a)(5) and (b) amended; interim............................52594
226.23  (a), (b), (c) (3) and (5), (d), (e)(2)(iv), (3), and (5) 
        amended; (e)(1)(iii) redesignated as (e)(1)(iv); new 
        (e)(1) (iii) and (v) added; (c)(2), (e)(1) (i) and (ii), 
        (2) heading, introductory text, (ii), (v), (vi), and 
        (vii), and (4) revised; interim............................52594
    (f), (h) introductory text, (2)(i), and (4) amended; (h) (1) 
and (2) (iii), (iv) introductory text, (A), and (C), and (v) 
revised; (h)(2)(iv)(D) removed; interim............................52596
226.25  (c) amended; (g) added; interim............................52597
226.26  (a) and (e) revised; interim...............................52597
246  Authority citation revised....................................25314
246.4  (a)(8) revised; (a)(14)(viii) added; interim................25314
246.7  (d)(1) revised; (f)(4) removed; (h)(9) added................35301
246.10  (f) added; interim.........................................25314
246.12  (f)(3) revised; (k)(1)(iv) redesignated as (k)(1)(v); new 
        (k)(1)(iv) added...........................................35301
246.14  (a)(2) revised; interim....................................25314
246.16  (c)(3)(i) and (ii) revised; (c)(3)(iii) added...............2221
    (b)(2) revised; (g) added; interim.............................25315
246.25  (b)(2) revised.............................................15653
246.26  (d) revised................................................35301
246.28  Table amended (OMB numbers)................................15653
247  Authority citation revised.....................................4838
247.2  Amended......................................................4838
247.5  (a) introductory text revised; (a) (15) and (16) and (c) 
        republished.................................................4839
247.7  (a) (1) through (3) republished; (b)(2) and (g) revised......4839
247.10  Revised.....................................................4840
247.24  Added.......................................................4841
250  Revised; interim..............................................20426
    Authority citation revised....................................20598,
                                              22469, 26219, 27475, 46080
250.3  Amended.....................................................20598
    Amended; interim...............................................27475

[[Page 946]]

250.13  (a)(2) revised; (g) and (h) redesignated as (h) and (i); 
        new (g) added; interim.....................................22469
    (a) revised; (j) and (k) added; interim........................27475
250.17  (d) redesignated as (e); new (d) added; OMB statement 
        amended; interim...........................................27476
250.23  Added; interim.............................................27476
250.30  (d) and (e) revised........................................20598
    (b)(1) amended; interim........................................27476
    (k)(4) added...................................................46080
250.47  (a) revised; interim.......................................27476
250.48  (a) text redesignated as (a)(1); (a)(2) added..............26219
    (c), (d), (e) and (f) redesignated as (d), (e), (f) and (g); 
new (c) added; interim.............................................27476
251.10  (f) revised................................................15357
252.2  Amended; interim............................................34014
252.4  (b) revised; interim........................................16379
    (c)(4)(iii) added; interim.....................................34014
271.2  Amendment in part at 52 FR 7556 confirmed; eff. to 9-30-90 
                                                                   24676
      Amended; interim.............................................39440
272.1  (g)(95) added................................................1604
    (g)(96) added; interim..........................................2822
    (g)(88) addition confirmed......................................6558
    (g)(98) added; interim.........................................22292
    Technical correction...........................................23484
    (g)(85) addition at 52 FR 7557 confirmed; (g)(99) added; eff. 
to 9-30-90.........................................................24676
    (g)(100) added.................................................26224
    (g)(97) added..................................................31644
    (b) redesignated as (b)(1); (b) (2) and (3), and (g)(101) 
added..............................................................31648
    (c)(1) (iii) through (v) redesignated as (c)(1) (iv) through 
(vi); new (c)(1)(iii) and (g)(102) added; interim..................39440
    (g)(103) added; interim........................................44172
272.2  (a)(2) amended..............................................26224
    (a)(2) amended; (d)(1)(vii) added; interim.....................39440
272.8  (f) heading and introductory text, (g), (i) and (j)(1) 
        revised; (f)(7) added; (h) amended; interim (effective 
        date pending in part).......................................2822
272.11  Added; interim.............................................39440
273.1  (e)(5) and (f)(4)(iv) addition at 52 FR 7557 confirmed; 
        (b)(2)(ii) amended; eff. to 9-30-90........................24676
    (d)(2) amended.................................................31645
    (b)(2)(viii) added; interim....................................39441
273.2  (f)(1)(ii) (A) and (B) amendments, (f)(1)(ii) (D), (E), and 
        (F) redesignation as (f)(1)(ii) (E), (F), and (G) and 
        (f)(1)(ii)(D) addition confirmed............................6558
    (b), (f)(1)(ii) (C) and (G), and (h)(3)(i) amended; (f)(1)(ii) 
(B), (E), and (F) revised; (f)(10) added; interim..................39441
273.4  (a) (2), (3), (4), and (5) amendment and (a) (8) through 
        (11) addition confirmed.....................................6558
273.7  (b)(1)(vii) amended; eff. to 9-30-90........................24676
    (c)(11) and (n)(5)(iii) added; (f)(3)(ii), (g)(1), (n)(1) (i), 
(ii), and (5)(ii) amended; (n) introductory text, (1) (iii) and 
(vi), and (2) revised..............................................31645
273.8  (c)(3) amended; eff. to 9-30-90.............................24676
273.9  (c) (2) through (12) redesignated as (c) (3) through (13); 
        new (c)(2) added; interim..................................22292
    Technical correction...........................................23484
    (b)(4) and (5)(i) amended; eff. to 9-30-90.....................24676
273.11  (h), (i), and (j) redesignation as (i), (j), (k), and new 
        (h) addition at 52 FR 7557 confirmed; (i)(2) (ii), (iii), 
        (v), (vi), and (vii), (4), (5) (i)(B) and (ii), (6), and 
        (7) amended; eff. to 9-30-90...............................24676
    (c) introductory text amended; (c)(2) introductory text 
revised; interim...................................................39442
273.22  (b)(1) revised; (f)(9) added...............................31646
273.23  Added......................................................26224
274.2  (h)(1) amended; eff. to 9-30-90.............................24676
274.3  (c)(1) introductory text amended; eff. to 9-30-90...........24676
274.10  (e), (f), (g), and (h) redesignation as (f), (g), (h), and 
        (i), new (e) addition, and new (i) amendment at 52 FR 7557 
        confirmed; eff. to 9-30-90.................................24676
275.3  (c)(4) revised...............................................1604
275.12  (d)(2)(vi) added; interim..................................39443

[[Page 947]]

    (d)(2)(v) revised; (d)(2) (vii) and (viii) added; interim......44172
275.13  (c) text redesignated as (c)(1); (c)(2) added; interim.....39443
277.4  (b)(10) added; interim......................................39443
277.19  Added; interim.............................................39443
278.1  (c)(4) amendment, (c)(5) and (h) through (q) redesignation 
        as (c)(6) and (i) through (r), new (c)(5) and (h) addition 
        at 52 FR 7557 confirmed; eff. to 9-30-90...................24676
    (l) revised....................................................31649
278.2  (b) amended.................................................31649
278.9  (g) added; eff. to 9-30-90..................................24676

                                  1989

7 CFR
                                                                   54 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter II
210.2  Amended.....................................................12580
210.4--210.8 (Subpart B)  Heading revised..........................12580
210.5  (d)(1) amended..............................................12580
210.7  (a) amended; (c) added......................................12581
210.8  Heading revised; (a) through (c) redesignated as (b) 
        through (d); new (a) added; new (b), (c), and (d) amended 
                                                                   12581
210.9  (b)(8) revised; (b) (9) through (18) redesignated as (b) 
        (10) through (19); new (b)(9) added; new (b)(19) amended 
                                                                   12581
210.15  (a)(4) and (b)(1) amended..................................12582
210.18  Nomenclature change; (g)(2) removed; (g) (3) through (6) 
        redesignated as (g) (2) through (5); new (g)(6) added; new 
        (g)(2)(ii), (i)(1) (ii) and (iii), (i)(3)(ii), (4) 
        introductory text and (ii), and (n)(5) revised; (m)(1) 
        amended....................................................12582
210.19  (c) introductory text and (d)(1) amended; (c)(1) revised 
                                                                   12582
210  Appendix B amended............................................18465
215.2  (e-1) amended; (v) revised; (x-1) redesignated as (x-2); 
        new (x-1) added.............................................2989
215.3  (b) and (c) amended..........................................2989
215.13  (a)(1) amended..............................................2990
215.16  (a) and (g) amended.........................................2990
220  Authority citation revised....................................13047
220.2  (c) and (u) revised; (m) removed; (x-1) added; (z) amended 
                                                                    2990
220.3  (b) and (c) amended..........................................2990
220.8  (f) revised..................................................2990
    (a) revised; (b) (1) and (3) removed; (b)(2) introductory 
text, (2) (i), (ii), and (iii) redesignated as (b) introductory 
text, (1), (2), and (3); new (b) introductory text heading added 
                                                                   13047
    (a)(2) table corrected; (3) correctly designated...............13605
220.15  (a)(1) amended..............................................2990
220.20  (f) and (g) amended.........................................2990
220.21  Added (OMB numbers).........................................2990
220  Appendix A amended............................................13048
    Appendix B amended.............................................18466
225  Revised.......................................................18208
225.2  Amended.....................................................27153
225.16  (d)(3) table amended.......................................27153
226.2  Amended.....................................................27153
226.15  (e) (5) through (11) redesignated as (e) (6) through (12); 
        new (e)(5) added; interim..................................26724
226.17  (b)(3) amended; interim....................................26724
226.19  (b)(4) revised; (b)(5) removed; (b) (6) through (10) 
        redesignated as (b) (5) through (9); new (b)(5) amended; 
        interim....................................................26724
226.20  (c) (1), (2), and (3) tables amended.......................27153
226.25  (g)(1)(ii) revised; interim................................13049
235.2  (o) revised; (q-1) added; (u) and (v) removed................2991
235.4  (b)(2) amended...............................................2991
235.8  (a) amended..................................................2991
246  Authority citation revised.............................18091, 22276
246.1  Amended; interim; eff. 1-16-90..............................51294
246.2  Amended; interim; eff. 1-16-90..............................51294
246.4  (a) (6), (7), (9), and (11)(ii) revised; (a)(14) (vi), 
        (vii), and (viii) amended; (a)(14)(ix) and (19) added; 
        interim; eff. 1-16-90......................................51294
246.7  (i)(6) revised; (m) added; interim; eff. 1-16-90............51295

[[Page 948]]

246.10  (e) revised; interim; eff. 1-16-90.........................51295
246.12  (o) removed; (p) through (u) redesignated as (o) through 
        (t); interim; eff. 1-16-90.................................51295
246.14  (a)(2) revised; interim....................................18091
246.16  (b)(2) amended; (b)(3) redesignated as (b)(4); new (b)(3), 
        (h), (i), (j), and (k) added; (g) heading revised; (g) (7) 
        and (8) removed; interim...................................18091
    (b)(3)(vi) correctly designated................................19486
246.28  Amended (OMB number); interim; eff. 1-16-90................51295
246.29  Added; interim.............................................22276
250  Authority citation revised....................................42475
250.14  Heading revised; (a) through (e) redesignated as (b) 
        through (f); new (a) added.................................42475
250.15  (a)(1) revised; (a)(2) amended.............................42476
250.18  (b)(1) amended..............................................7525
250.19  (b)(2) (i) and (iii) revised; (b)(2) (iv) through (vi) 
        added.......................................................7525
    (b)(2)(vi) (A) and (B) corrected...............................25564
    (c) redesignated as (d); new (c) added.........................42477
250.24  Added......................................................42477
250.30  (c)(1) and (k) amended; (j)(1)(i)(D) and (ii)(F) added; 
        (m)(1)(vii) removed; (m)(1) (viii) through (x) 
        redesignated as (m)(1) (vii) through (ix); (c)(4)(ii), 
        (viii)(I), (d), (e), new (m)(1)(viii), (n)(3), and (q)(5) 
        revised.....................................................7525
    (d)(1)(iii), (2), and (3) correctly designated; (d)(1)(iii) 
and (e)(1) corrected...............................................25564
271  Technical correction..........................................25547
271.2  Amended...............................................7002, 24154
    (11) added; interim............................................24527
271.7  (b), (c), (d), and (e) amended..............................24154
271.8  Table amended (OMB numbers)..................................7002
    Table amended (OMB numbers); interim...........................24527
272  Technical correction..........................................25547
272.1  (g)(104) added...............................................4251
    (g)(105) added..................................................7003
    Regulation at 52 FR 26941 confirmed; (g)(90) amended; (g)(106) 
added..............................................................12174
    Regulation at 53 FR 22292 confirmed............................19872
    (g)(111) added.................................................23951
    (g)(109) added.................................................24154
    Regulation at 51 FR 28200 confirmed; (g)(78)(ii) revised; 
(g)(108) added.....................................................24515
    (g)(110) added; interim........................................24527
    (g)(107) added.................................................24666
272.2  (a)(2) amended; (d)(1)(viii) added...........................7003
    (a)(2) amended; (d)(1)(ix) added; interim......................24527
    (d)(1)(viii) amended...........................................51351
272.4  (f) added....................................................7003
    (b)(3)(ii)(B) and (d)(1)(i) amended; (d)(2) redesignated as 
(d)(3); new (d)(2) added; interim..................................24527
272.5  (c) revised; interim........................................24527
272.7  (c) and (f)(3)(iii) amended.................................24154
273  Technical correction..........................................25547
273.1  (e) introductory text and (1) through (5) redesignated as 
        (e)(1) and (1) (i) through (v); new (e)(2) added............4251
    (f) introductory text added; (f)(1) introductory text and (i) 
(A) and (B) removed; (f)(1)(i), (ii), and (iii) redesignated as 
(f)(1) introductory text, (i), and (ii); new (f)(1) introductory 
text, (2) (i) and (ii) amended......................................7003
    (f)(1) introductory text, (i), and (ii) correctly removed; 
(f)(1)(i), (A), and (B) redesignated as (f)(1) introductory text, 
(i), and (ii)......................................................12174
273.2  (c)(1), (g)(1), (i)(3)(i), (j)(1)(iv), and (2)(i) amended; 
        (k)(1)(i) (D) through (O) redesignated as (k)(1)(i) (E) 
        through (P); new (k)(1)(i)(D) added; new (k)(1)(i) (F), 
        (I), and (J) amended........................................4252
    (g)(1) amended; (g)(2) removed; (g)(3) redesignated as new 
(g)(2)..............................................................7004

[[Page 949]]

    Regulation at 52 FR 26941 confirmed; (e)(2) amended; (f)(1)(x) 
correctly designated...............................................12174
    Regulation at 51 FR 28201 confirmed; (j)(1)(iv) and (2) 
revised; (k) introductory text amended.............................24516
    (b), (f)(5)(i), (8)(i)(A) and (ii) revised, (c)(5) 
redesignated as (c)(6); new (c)(5) added; (d)(1), (e)(2), 
(f)(8)(i)(C), (g)(2), (h)(1)(i)(C), (j) introductory text and 
(1)(i) amended; (f)(1)(viii)(A)(6) and (j)(1)(v) added; interim....24528
273.7  (d)(1) heading revised; (d)(1)(i)(A) amended; (d)(1)(i) (B) 
        through (E) redesignated as (d)(1)(i) (C) through (F); new 
        (d)(1)(i)(B) added.........................................24666
273.8  Regulation at 52 FR 26941 confirmed; (h)(1)(vi) 
        redesignated as (e)(16) and amended........................12174
    (e)(5) and (h)(1)(i) amended...................................24529
    Regulation at 51 FR 28202 confirmed............................24518
273.9  Regulation at 52 FR 26941 confirmed; (b)(1) (iii) and (v) 
        amended....................................................12175
    Regulation at 53 FR 22292 confirmed; (c)(2) and (3) through 
(13) redesignated as (c)(13) and (2) through (12)..................19872
    (c)(1)(ii) (C) and (D) and (11) amended; (c)(1)(ii)(E) and 
(14) added; (d)(4) revised.........................................24154
    Regulation at 51 FR 28202 confirmed............................24518
    (c)(1) amended; interim........................................24528
    (d)(4) amended.................................................51351
273.10  (a)(1) (i) and (ii) amended.................................4252
    (g)(3) removed..................................................7004
    (a)(1)(ii) introductory text, (d)(1)(i), (e)(1)(i)(E), 
(2)(ii)(A), (vi) (A) and (C), and (4)(ii)(C) amended; (e)(4) 
heading and (i) revised; (e)(4)(ii) (D), (E), and (F) added........24155
    Regulation at 51 FR 28202 confirmed; (d)(7) revised............24518
    (d)(1)(i), (g)(1)(i)(A) and (ii) amended; interim..............24529
273.11  (i), (j), and (k) redesignated as (j), (k), and (l); new 
        (i) added...................................................4253
    (k) removed; (l) redesignated as (k)............................7004
    (e)(7) amended.................................................12175
    (c)(2)(iii) amended............................................24155
    (a)(1)(v) added; interim.......................................24530
273.12  (e) introductory text and (1)(i)(A) amended; (e)(1)(i)(C) 
        revised....................................................24155
    (a)(1)(vi) revised; (b)(1) (ii) and (iii) amended; (b)(1) (iv) 
and (v) added; interim.............................................24530
273.13  (a)(2) amended; interim....................................24530
273.17  (a)(1) introductory text amended...........................24518
273.18  (i) (1) and (2) removed; (i) amended........................7004
    (a) (1), and (2) revised; (b)(1) (iv) and (v) and (2)(vi) 
added; (c)(1)(ii) amended..........................................24518
273.21  (a)(4), (b), and (g) introductory text revised; (g)(1) 
        removed; (g) (2) through (4) redesignated as new (g) (1) 
        through (3); (d) introductory text and (2), (e) heading, 
        (f) heading, and (1)(ii), (g) heading, and new (g) (1), 
        (2), and (3) headings, and new (g)(3) amended..............24155
    (c) introductory text, (5), (i)(3), and (j)(3)(iii)(C) 
revised; (h)(3)(iii) and (j)(3)(iii)(D) redesignated as (h)(4) and 
(j)(3)(iii)(E); new (h)(3)(iii) and (4) heading and new 
(j)(3)(iii)(D) added; (f)(2)(i), (h)(3) (i) and (ii), (i)(1) and 
(j)(3)(iii)(B) amended.............................................24530
    (b) introductory text, (1) and (2) correctly revised; (b)(3) 
correctly redesignated as (c)(7); new (b)(3) correctly added.......51351
274  Revised........................................................7004
274.2  (b) (2) and (3) revised; (b)(4) added; interim..............24530
    (b)(2) and (c)(1) amended......................................51351
274.3  (d)(4) and (e)(1) amended...................................51351
274.4  (b)(2)(ii) amended..........................................51351
274.6  (b)(1) amended..............................................51351
274.7  (f)(1) amended..............................................51351

[[Page 950]]

274.10  Heading and (a)(3) revised; (b)(4)(i) amended; new (d) 
        through (j) added..........................................51351
275.3  (c)(4) amended..............................................23951
275.10  (a) amended.................................................7016
276.1  Revised......................................................7016
276.2  Revised......................................................7016
    Regulation at 26941 confirmed; (d) amended.....................12175
    (b)(4)(ii) amended.............................................51351
277.4  (f) added; interim..........................................24531
277  Appendix A amended; interim...................................24531
278.1  (e) amended.................................................12175
278.6  (a), (f) (1) and (4) amended; (b), (i) and (j) redesignated 
        as (b)(1), (l) and (m); (b) heading, (2), new (i), (j), 
        and (k) added; (f), (g), and (h) headings revised; interim
                                                                   18645

                                  1990

7 CFR
                                                                   55 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter II
210.10  (d)(1) introductory text and (i) through (iii) removed; 
        new (d)(1) added...........................................18858
210.28  Redesignated as 210.29; new 210.28 added............41503, 41504
210.29  Redesignated as 210.30; new 210.29 redesignated from 
        210.28.....................................................41503
210.30  Redesignated from 210.29...................................41503
215  Authority citation revised.....................................1377
215.2  (d) and (e) amended..........................................1377
225.2  Amended; interim............................................13466
    Regulation at 55 FR 13466 comment time extended; interim.......50315
225.3  (b) amended; interim........................................13466
    Regulation at 55 FR 13466 comment time extended; interim.......50315
225.4  (d)(2) and (3) revised; interim.............................13466
    Regulation at 55 FR 13466 comment time extended; interim.......50315
225.6  (a)(3) and (c)(2)(iv) through (viii) redesignated as (a)(4) 
        and (c)(2)(vi) through (x); (a)(2), (b)(6), and (e)(1) 
        revised; new (a)(3), (5), (b)(5)(vi) and new (c)(2)(iv) 
        and (v) added; (b)(1), (5)(iv) and (v), (c)(2)(ii), new 
        (c)(2)(x), (d)(1)(i), (g)(1) and (3), and (h)(7) amended; 
        interim....................................................13467
    Regulation at 55 FR 13467 comment time extended; interim.......50315
225.7  (a), (d)(1)(iii) amended; (d)(1)(iv) added; (d)(2) revised; 
        interim....................................................13468
    Regulation at 55 FR 13468 comment time extended; interim.......50315
225.8  (e) added; interim..........................................13469
    Regulation at 55 FR 13469 comment time extended; interim.......50315
225.9  (d)(6) introductory text, (7) introductory text and (9) 
        revised; (d)(10) redesignated as (d)(11); new (d)(10) 
        added; interim.............................................13469
    Regulation at 55 FR 13469 comment time extended; interim.......50315
225.11  (c)(3) amended; interim....................................13469
    Regulation at 55 FR 13469 comment time extended; interim.......50315
225.14  (b)(3), (4), (c)(3), (6), (d)(1) and (4) amended; (b)(5), 
        (d)(5), (6), and (7) added; interim........................13469
    Regulation at 55 FR 13469 comment time extended; interim.......50315
225.15  (a)(2) revised; (g)(3) and (5)(xii) amended; interim.......13470
    Regulation at 55 FR 13470 comment time extended; interim.......50315
225.16  (f)(2) amended..............................................1377
    (b)(2), (3), (e), and (f) redesignated as (b)(4), (5), (f), 
and (g); new (b)(2), (3), and (e) added; new (b)(4) revised; 
(d)(1), (2), and (3) amended; interim..............................13470
    Regulation at 55 FR 13470 comment time extended; interim.......50315

[[Page 951]]

225.18  (e) and (g) amended; (i) added; interim....................13471
    Regulation at 55 FR 13471 comment time extended; interim.......50315
225.19  (a), (b), (c), and (g) amended; interim....................13471
    Regulation at 55 FR 13471 comment time extended; interim.......50315
226  Heading revised................................................1377
226.1  Amended......................................................1377
226.2  Amended......................................................1377
226.6  (d)(1)(i), (v), (2) heading, (i) introductory text, (I), 
        (3), and (e)(1) amended.....................................1377
226.7  (d) amended..................................................1378
226.8  (b) amended..................................................1378
226.9  (c) introductory text amended................................1378
226.10  (c) and (e) amended.........................................1378
226.15  (i) amended.................................................1378
226.17  (b)(1)(ii) amended..........................................1378
226.18  (a)(2) amended..............................................1378
226.19  (b)(1)(ii) amended..........................................1378
226.19a  (b)(6) amended.............................................1378
226.23  (e)(1)(i), (ii)(F), and (h)(2)(iv)(C) amended...............1378
235  Authority citation revised.....................................1378
235.1  Amended......................................................1378
235.2  (i) amended..................................................1378
235.4  (b) introductory text, (1), (4), and (c) amended.............1378
235.5  (b)(1) and (2) amended.......................................1378
235.6  (c) amended..................................................1378
235.7  (c) amended..................................................1378
235.11  (a), (b)(1) and (3) amended.................................1378
245.2  (a-3) revised; (a-4) amended; interim.......................19239
245.6  (a) introductory text, (1), and (b) introductory text 
        amended; interim...........................................19240
245.6a  (a)(2) revised; interim....................................19240
246  Authority citation revised.....................................3386
246.2  Amended; interim.............................................9717
246.4  (a)(14)(x) added; interim....................................9717
246.7  (c)(1) introductory text and (2)(iii) amended; (c)(2)(iv) 
        through (vii) redesignated as (c)(2)(v), (vi), (viii), and 
        (ix); new (c)(2)(iv) and (vii) added; new (c)(2)(vi) 
        revised.....................................................3387
246.16  (l) through (q) added; interim..............................9717
    (m)(2)(i)(A), (C), (ii), (o)(2), and (i) corrected.............11109
246.29  Removed; interim............................................9719
272  Technical correction...........................................8288
272.1  (g)(112) added...............................................1672
    (g)(113) added..................................................6238
    (g)(114) added.................................................33277
    Regulation at 53 FR 44172 confirmed; (g)(115) added............48834
272.2  (a)(2) amended; (d)(1)(x) added..............................6238
272.4  (g) and (h) added............................................6238
272.5  (b)(1)(iv) added.............................................6239
272.12  Added.......................................................6239
273  Technical correction...........................................8288
273.1  (d)(1) and (2) amended......................................33277
273.7  (c)(2), (d)(1)(i)(F), (f)(1) introductory text, (g)(1), 
        (2), (h) introductory text, (k)(1) introductory text, (2), 
        (n)(1)(vi), (o)(2), (3), (5) introductory text and (ii) 
        amended; (g)(2) heading, (o)(6), (7) revised...............33278
273.9  (b)(2)(ii) amended...........................................6240
273.11  (c)(2)(ii) CFR corrected...................................31571
    (c) introductory text, (1) introductory text and (3)(ii) 
amended............................................................33279
273.18  (d)(3) revised; (d)(4)(iii) amended; (g)(3) redesignated 
        as (g)(4); new (g)(3) and (k)(5) added......................6240
274  Technical correction...........................................8288
275.3  (c)(4)(i)(D) and (ii)(C) added...............................1672
275.12  Regulation at 53 FR 44172 confirmed; (d)(2)(v) and (vii) 
        revised; (d)(2)(viii) amended..............................48834
275.15  (g) added...................................................6240
276  Technical correction...........................................8288
277.18  Revised.....................................................4355
277  Appendix A amended.............................................4361
278.6  Regulation at 54 FR 18645 confirmed; (i) introductory text 
        and (2)(i) amended.........................................31812
278.9  (h) added...................................................31813

                                  1991

7 CFR
                                                                   56 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter II
210.2  Amended.....................................................32939
210.5  (d)(1) amended..............................................32939

[[Page 952]]

210.7  (c) revised.................................................32939
210.8  (a), (b) and (c) revised....................................32940
210.9  (b)(8) amended; (b)(18) revised.............................32941
210.10  (b) amended................................................32941
210.15  (a)(1), (3), (b)(1) and (2) revised; (a)(4) and (5) 
        removed; (a)(6), (7), (8), (b)(3) and (4) redesignated as 
        (a)(4), (5), (6), (b)(4) and (5); new (b)(3) added; new 
        (b)(4) amended; new (b)(5) revised.........................32941
210.18  Redesignated as 210.18a; new 210.18 added..................32942
    (b)(2)(ii), (e)(1) Table A, (i)(4) introductory text, (5)(i), 
(ii), (iii), (6)(i), (l)(4) and (p)(2) corrected...................55527
210.18a  Redesignated from 210.18..................................32942
    Heading and (a) revised; (b) through (e) removed; (f) through 
(n) redesignated as (b) through (j); new (c)(1) through (7) 
redesignated as (c)(2) through (8); new (c)(1) added; new (b), new 
(c)(7), new (e) introductory text, (3)(i), (4)(ii), (iii), new (f) 
introductory text, new (g) and new (i)(3) amended..................32947
210.19  (c)(2) through (6) redesignated as (c)(3) through (7); new 
        (c)(2) added; (a), (c) introductory text, (1), new (c)(6) 
        and (d) revised............................................32947
210.20  (a)(5), (6), (b)(6) and (7) revised; (a)(7), (b)(4), (5), 
        (8) and (11) amended.......................................32948
    (b)(8) corrected...............................................55527
210.24  Redesignated as 210.25; new 210.24 added...................32948
210.25  Redesignated as 210.26; new 210.25 redesignated from 
        210.24.....................................................32948
210.26  Redesignated as 210.27; new 210.26 redesignated from 
        210.25.....................................................32948
210.27  Redesignated as 210.28; new 210.27 redesignated from 
        210.26.....................................................32948
210.28  Redesignated as 210.29; new 210.28 redesignated from 
        210.27.....................................................32948
210.29  Redesignated as 210.31; new 210.29 redesignated from 
        210.28.....................................................32948
210.30  Redesignated as 210.32.....................................32948
    Added..........................................................32949
210.31  Redesignated from 210.29...................................32948
210.32  Redesignated from 210.30...................................32948
215  Authority citation revised....................................32949
215.11  (b)(2) amended.............................................32949
220.13  (l) added..................................................30311
    (f)(2) added...................................................32949
    Corrected......................................................37954
226.15  (e)(5) revised.............................................58174
226.19  (b)(4) revised.............................................58175
235  Authority citation revised....................................32949
235.4  (b)(3)(i) through (iv) amended..............................32949
235.6  (a-2) amended...............................................32949
235.11  (b)(2)(i) through (v) revised..............................32950
245  Authority citation revised....................................32950
245.2  (a-4) introductory text and (1) through (4) revised.........33860
    Corrected......................................................52120
245.6  (b) introductory text amended...............................32950
    (a) introductory text, (1), and (b) introductory text amended 
                                                                   33860
    (a)(1) corrected...............................................52120
245.6a  (c)(2) and (3) amended; (c)(4), (5) and (6) added..........32950
    (a) introductory text amended..................................33861
    (a) introductory text corrected................................52120
271  Authority citation revised....................................12845
271.2  Amended.......................................54776, 55059, 60050
    Amended; eff. 2-1-92...........................................63596
    Amended; eff. 1-3-92...........................................63603
271.7  (b), (d)(1)(ii), (2)(i) and (3) amended; eff. 2-1-92........63596
271.8  Table amended (OMB numbers).................................55059
272  Authority citation revised....................................12845
272.1  (g)(116) added; interim.....................................12845
    (g)(117) added; interim........................................23005
    (g)(85) added..................................................54777

[[Page 953]]

    (g)(118) added.................................................55059
    (g)(119) added.................................................60050
    (g)(120) added; eff. 2-1-92....................................63596
    (g)(121) added; eff. 1-3-92....................................63603
    (g)(122) added; eff. 2-1-92....................................63611
    (g)(123) added; eff. 2-1-92....................................63616
    (g)(120)(ii) corrected.........................................66120
272.9  Added.......................................................54777
273  Authority citation revised....................................12845
273.1  (b)(2)(viii) removed; interim...............................12845
    (b)(2)(ii) amended; (f)(4)(iv) added...........................54777
    (e)(1)(iii) amended; eff. 2-1-92...............................63596
273.2  (b)(1)(iii) amended; (b)(1)(iv) removed; (b)(1)(v) through 
        (viii) redesignated as (b)(1)(iv) through (vii); interim 
                                                                   12845
    (c)(1), (i)(3)(i), (k)(1)(i)(D) and (H) amended; (m) added; 
eff. 2-1-92........................................................63596
    (j)(3)(iv) and (4) redesignated as (j)(3)(iii)(D) and (5); 
(b)(1)(v), (vi), (vii), (3), (j) introductory text, (1)(iv), 
(2)(v)(D) and new (j)(3)(iii)(D) amended; (j)(2) heading, (3) 
introductory text, (i), (ii) and (iii) revised; (j)(2)(v)(E) and 
(4) added; effective in part 2-1-92 and 8-1-92.....................63611
    (j)(3)(i), (4)(iii)(A) and (B) corrected.......................66120
273.4  (a)(8) amended; eff. 2-1-92.................................63596
273.7  (b)(1)(vii) amended.........................................54777
    (c)(2), (d)(1)(i)(F), (ii)(D), (f)(1)(ii), (2)(iii) and (o)(7) 
amended; (c)(4)(xii), (d)(1)(ii) introductory text and (E) and 
(f)(1)(vi) added; (d)(1)(ii)(A) and (B) and (g)(1) revised.........55059
273.8  (e)(17) added; interim......................................23005
    (c)(3) amended.................................................54777
    (a) amended; eff. 2-1-92.......................................63613
273.9  (c)(1)(ii) introductory text revised; (c)(1)(ii)(D) and (E) 
        amended; (c)(1)(ii)(F) and (5)(i)(F) added; interim........12845
    (b)(4) and (5)(i) amended......................................54777
    (c)(5)(i)(A) amended; (c)(5)(i)(G) and (15) added; 
(c)(5)(ii)(A) revised..............................................55062
    (b)(1)(iii) and (v) amended; (c)(10)(v) revised; eff. 2-1-92 
                                                                   63596
    (a) introductory text amended; eff. 2-1-92.....................63613
    (d)(5) introductory text and (i) through (v) redesignated as 
(d)(5)(ii) introductory text and (A) through (E); new (d)(5)(i) 
added; new (d)(5)(ii) heading added; eff. 2-1-92...................63617
273.10  (e)(2)(ii)(C) and (vi)(D) amended; (e)(2)(vi)(B) revised; 
        eff. 2-1-92................................................63597
    (g)(1)(ii) amended; eff. 2-1-92................................63613
273.11  (c) introductory text and (c)(2) introductory text 
        amended; interim...........................................12845
    (c) introductory text corrected................................14289
    (h), (i) and (j) redesignated as (i), (j) and (k); new (h) 
added; new (j)(2)(ii), (iii), (v), (vi), (vii), (j)(4), (5)(i)(B), 
(ii), (j)(6) and (7) amended.......................................54777
273.12  (e)(1)(i) introductory text revised; eff. 1-3-92...........63603
    (f)(1) amended; eff. 2-1-92....................................63613
273.18  (g)(4) amended; eff. 2-1-92................................63597
    (a)(2), (b)(1)(iv) and (2)(vi) amended; eff. 2-1-92............63613
273.21  (a) introductory text, (b) introductory text, (d) 
        introductory text, (1), (f)(1)(iii)(B) and (C), (g) 
        introductory text, (3), (j)(1)(vii)(A), (B)(2), 
        (k)(2)(ii), (m)(2)(iv), (p)(2)(i), (iii) and (q)(3)(ii) 
        amended; (f)(2)(iv) and (v) redesignated as (f)(2)(vii) 
        and (viii); (e)(2), (f)(2)(ii), (iii), (h)(3), (i), 
        (j)(1)(ii)(B), (C), (l)(1) and (q)(4)(ii) revised; (b)(4), 
        (f)(1)(iii)(D), new (f)(2)(iv), (v), (vi), (j)(1)(vii)(B) 
        concluding text, (r) and (s) added; effective in part 11-
        28-90, 1-3-92 and 2-1-92...................................63603
274  Authority citation revised....................................12845
274.6  (b)(3) amended; eff. 2-1-92.................................63617
275  Authority citation revised....................................12845

[[Page 954]]

275.1  (b) revised.................................................60051
275.3  (c)(1)(i)(A) and (3)(i)(A) revised; (c)(1)(i)(B) and 
        (3)(i)(B) redesignated as (c)(1)(i)(C) and (3)(i)(C); new 
        (c)(1)(i)(B) and (3)(i)(B) added...........................60051
275.10  (a) amended................................................60051
275.11  (a)(2)(ii) through (v) removed; (a)(2)(vi), (vii) and 
        (viii) redesignated as (a)(2)(ii), (iii) and (iv); (a)(2) 
        introductory text and (b)(4) introductory text amended; 
        (b)(4)(i), (ii) and (iii) added............................60051
275.16  (b)(2) revised; (b)(6) added...............................60052
275.23  (e)(4) through (7) redesignated as (e)(5) through (8); 
        (c)(2), (d)(2), (e)(2) heading, (i), (3) heading, new 
        (e)(7)(i) and (iii) revised; (c)(3) amended; new (e)(4) 
        and (9) added..............................................60052
276  Authority citation revised....................................12845
277  Authority citation revised....................................12845
277.4  (b)(2) revised; (b)(8) amended..............................60053
278  Authority citation revised....................................12845
278.1  (c)(4) amended; (c)(5) redesignated as (c)(6); new (c)(5) 
        and (r) added..............................................54777
    (f) amended; eff. 2-1-92.......................................63597
278.2  (a) through (d), (g) and (h) amended; (l) added.............54778
278.3  (a) amended.................................................54778
278.4  (c) amended.................................................54778
278.6  (e)(2)(iii), (iv), (3)(iii) and (v) amended.................54778
278.9  (e) and (g) added...........................................54778
279  Authority citation revised....................................12845
280  Authority citation revised....................................12845
280.1  Amended; eff. 2-1-92........................................63617
281  Authority citation revised....................................12845
282  Authority citation revised....................................12845
284  Authority citation revised....................................12845
285  Authority citation revised....................................12845

                                  1992

7 CFR
                                                                   57 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter II
210.18  (a), (c) introductory text, (e)(1), (g)(1) introductory 
        text, (i)(B), (j), (l) introductory text, and (m) amended; 
        (g)(1)(i)(A) introductory text, (1), (l)(1) and (3) 
        revised; (g)(1)(i)(A)(2), (3) and (q) redesignated as 
        (g)(1)(i)(A)(3), (4), and (r); new (g)(1)(i)(A)(2) and (q) 
        added; interim.............................................38584
    (g)(1), (l) and (j) corrected..................................40729
210.19  (c)(2)(ii) and (d) amended; interim........................38586
210.30  (d)(3) redesignated as (d)(4); new (d)(3) added; interim 
                                                                   38586
215.2  Amended added; interim......................................38586
215.11  (b)(2) amended; interim....................................38586
215.13  (e) revised; interim.......................................38586
220.2  Amended; interim............................................38587
220.13  (f)(2) amended; interim....................................38587
220.15  (f) revised; interim.......................................38587
246  Authority citation revised.............................34505, 56240
246.4  (a)(19) revised.............................................34506
246.7  (i)(6) amended; (m)(1)(i)(C) and (3) removed; (m)(1)(i)(D) 
        and (4) redesignated as (m)(1)(i)(C) and (3); (m)(1)(i) 
        introductory text, (iii), (2), and new (m)(3) revised; 
        (m)(4), (5) and (6) added..................................34506
246.10  (e)(1) amended.............................................34506
    (c) introductory text amended; (c)(5) heading revised; (c)(7) 
added..............................................................56240
271.2  Amended......................................................3911
271.5  (b) revised..................................................3911
272.1  (g)(124) added...............................................2828
    (g)(125) added.................................................11248
    (g)(126) added.................................................44486
    (g)(127) added.................................................60082
272.2  (e)(9) added................................................60082
273.1  (d)(1) revised; (d)(2) amended..............................60082
273.7  (c)(4)(viii) through (xii), (d)(1)(i)(B) through (F). 
        (n)(1)(vi) in part and (vii) redesignated as (c)(4)(ix) 
        through (xiii), (d)(1)(i)(C) through (G), (n)(1)(vii) and 
        (viii); (f)(1)(vii) and (5) added; (c)(4) introductory 
        text, (5), (g)(1)(i) and (n)(1)(vii) amended...............60082

[[Page 955]]

    (c)(4)(viii) added; eff. 1-19-93...............................60083
    (d)(1)(i)(A) revised; (d)(1)(i)(B) added.......................60083
273.10  (d)(1)(i) amended..........................................60083
274.3  (a) introductory text and (b) amended; (a)(4) added.........11249
274.10  (b)(1) amended.............................................11249
274.12  Added......................................................11249
    (c)(3)(i)(B), (e)(4)(vi), (f)(4), (10)(vi), (h)(2)(i), 
(l)(1)(iii) and (m)(1) corrected...................................44791
275.23  (e)(10) added...............................................2828
    (e)(5) and (6) revised.........................................44486
    (e)(6)(i)(A)(9) and (B)(1) corrected...........................47163
276.2  (b)(7) added................................................11259
    (b)(7) corrected...............................................44791
277.18  (c)(1) introductory text; (2)(ii)(A), (B), (C) and 
        (d)(1)(v) amended..........................................11259
278.1  (j)(2) and (k)(1)(iii) amended; (k)(1)(iv) redesignated as 
        (k)(1)(v); new (k)(1)(iv) added.............................3912
    (b)(5) redesignated as (b)(6); (q) introductory text amended; 
new (b)(5), (q)(1) and (2) added....................................3915
278.6  (a), (b)(1), (2)(i), (e)(1)(i), (i) introductory text and 
        (j) amended; (i)(2)(iii) revised; (l) and (m) redesignated 
        as (n) and (o); new (l) and (m) added.......................3912
278.9  (i) added....................................................3913
278.10  Added......................................................11259
279.3  (a)(2) amended...............................................3913
279.6  (a) amended..................................................3913
279.8  (c) amended..................................................3913
279.11  (c) added...................................................3913

                                  1993

7 CFR
                                                                   58 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter II
210.2  Amended.....................................................42487
210.4  (a) and (b)(1) heading amended; (b)(3) and (4) added........42487
210.6  Amended.....................................................42487
210.7  (a), (c) introductory text, (1) introductory text, (1)(i), 
        (ii), (iv) and (v) amended; (d) added......................42487
210.8  (c) introductory text, (1) and (2) and (d) amended..........42487
210.9  (b)(19) amended; (c) added..................................42488
210.10  Heading revised; (b) amended; (j) added....................42488
210.23  (a) amended................................................42489
226.20  (a)(3) and (c)(3) redesignated as (a)(4) and (c)(4); (a), 
        (c)(1) table, (2) undesignated center heading, 
        introductory text and table, new (4) introductory text and 
        table amended; new (a)(3) and new (c)(3) added; (p) 
        revised....................................................37850
235.4  (a) amended.................................................42489
240  Authority citation revised....................................39120
240.1  (c) and (f) revised.........................................39120
240.3  (b) amended.................................................39120
240.4  Heading revised; (a) amended................................39120
240.6  Amended.....................................................39120
245.2  (f) amended.................................................42489
246  Authority citation revised......................37634, 47022, 51568
246.1  Amended.....................................................11506
246.2  Amended.....................................................11506
    Amended; interim...............................................47022
246.4  (a)(8), (9) and (11)(ii) revised; (a)(11)(iii) and (iv) 
        amended; (a)(11)(v) added..................................11506
246.7  (a) amended; (n) added......................................11506
246.11  (a)(3) added; (b)(1) revised...............................11507
246.14  (c)(1) introductory text amended; (c)(9) added.............11507
246.16  (c)(2)(ii) introductory text revised................37635, 51568
    (r) added; interim.............................................47022
246.28  OMB numbers................................................11507
250  Authority citation revised....................................39120
250.3  Amended.....................................................39120
250.13  (a), (g) and (k) revised...................................39120
250.23  (a) revised................................................39122
250.30  (b)(1) amended.............................................39122
250.48  (b)(1) and (c) revised.....................................39122
250.49  Heading and (b)(1) revised.................................39123
271  Authority citation revised......................................215
271.2  Regulation at 52 FR 36397 confirmed.........................58453
272  Authority citation revised......................................215
272.1  Regulation at 56 FR 12845 confirmed...........................215

[[Page 956]]

    (g)(128) added.................................................58443
    Regulation at 52 FR 36397 confirmed; (g)(93)(i) amended; 
(g)(93)(iv) and (129) added........................................58453
    (g)(117) revised...............................................58457
272.5  Regulation at 52 FR 36398 confirmed.........................58453
273  Authority citation revised......................................215
273.1  Regulation at 56 FR 12845 confirmed...........................215
    (c)(6) added...................................................58443
    Regulation at 52 FR 36398 confirmed; (a)(2)(i)(C) and (D) 
amended and redesignated in part as (a)(2)(i)(C)(1), (2), (D)(1) 
and (2); new (a)(2)(i)(C)(2) and (D)(2) revised; (a)(2)(i)(C)(3) 
and (D)(3) added...................................................58453
273.2  Regulation at 56 FR 12845 confirmed...........................215
    Regulation at 52 FR 36398 confirmed; (i)(1)(iii) and (iv) 
amended............................................................58454
273.8  (e)(17) revised.............................................58457
273.9  Regulation at 56 FR 12845 confirmed...........................215
    (b)(1)(ii) and (2)(ii) amended; (c)(16) added..................58443
    Regulation at 58 FR 36398 confirmed; (c)(1)(ii)(G) added; 
(c)(1)(iv)(B) amended..............................................58454
273.10  Regulation at 52 FR 36399 confirmed; (f)(2) revised........58454
273.11  Regulation at 56 FR 12845 confirmed..........................215
    (b)(1) introductory text amended...............................58444
273.18  (c)(2)(ii) amended.........................................58454
274  Authority citation revised......................................215
275  Authority citation revised......................................215
276  Authority citation revised......................................215
277  Authority citation revised......................................215
278  Authority citation revised......................................215
279  Authority citation revised......................................215
280  Authority citation revised......................................215
281  Authority citation revised......................................215
282  Authority citation revised......................................215
284  Authority citation revised......................................215
285  Authority citation revised......................................215

                                  1994

7 CFR
                                                                   59 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter II
Chapter  II Heading revised; nomenclature change...................60062
210  Authority citation revised.....................................1894
210.11  (a)(2) amended.............................................23614
210.18  Regulation at 58 FR 38584 confirmed; (c) introductory text 
        and (l)(1)(iii) amended; (l)(1)(iv) removed; (l)(1)(v) 
        redesignated as (l)(1)(iv)..................................1894
210.19  Regulation at 58 FR 38586 confirmed; (c)(2)(ii) and (d) 
        amended.....................................................1894
210.30  Regulation at 58 FR 38586 confirmed.........................1894
210  Appendix B amended............................................23614
    Appendix A  amended............................................51086
    Appendix A  corrected..........................................52588
215  Authority citation revised.....................................1894
215.2  Regulation at 58 FR 38586 confirmed..........................1894
215.11  Regulation at 58 FR 38586 confirmed.........................1894
215.13  Regulation at 58 FR 38586 confirmed; (e) amended............1894
220  Authority citation revised.....................................1894
220.2  Regulation at 58 FR 38587 confirmed..........................1894
    (i-1)  amended.................................................23614
220.12  (b)(1) amended.............................................23614
220.13  Regulation at 58 FR 38587 confirmed.........................1894
220.15  Regulation at 58 FR 38587 confirmed; (f) amended............1894
246  Nomenclature change...........................................11498
246.2  Amended.....................................................11498
246.3  (b) amended; (c) and (e)(4) redesignated as (c)(1) and 
        (e)(5); new (c)(1) revised; (c)(2) and new (e)(4) added....11499

[[Page 957]]

246.4  (a)(2), (7), (10), (11)(i), (13) and (19) amended; (a)(8) 
        and (9) revised; (a)(20) through (23) added................11499
246.6  (b)(1) revised; (f) added...................................11500
246.7  (b) through (n) redesignated as (c) through (o) and 
        amended; new (b) and new (j)(9) added; new (d), (h)(1) 
        introductory text and (ii) revised.........................11500
246.9  (g) amended.................................................11503
246.11  (c)(2) amended; (c)(3), (5), (6) and (e)(4) revised; 
        (c)(8) added...............................................11503
246.12  (o), (r)(2)(ii) and (iii) amended; (r)(8) revised..........11503
246.14  (c) heading, introductory text and (1) revised; (c)(10) 
        added......................................................11503
246.16  (a) through (i) revised; (j) and (k) removed; (l) through 
        (q) redesignated as (j) through (o); new (k)(2)(ii) and 
        (iii) amended..............................................11504
    (c)(1),  (3) and (e)(2)(i) revised; (r) redesignated as (p) 
and amended........................................................50823
246.19  (b)(3) revised.............................................11508
246.24  (a) revised................................................11508
246.25  (b)(2) amended.............................................11508
246.27  (a) through (d) and (f) revised............................11508
248  Added; interim................................................11517
248.4  OMB number pending..........................................11519
248.9  OMB number pending..........................................11521
248.10  OMB number pending.........................................11521
248.11  OMB number pending.........................................11524
248.14  OMB number pending.........................................11524
248.17  OMB number pending.........................................11527
248.18  OMB number pending.........................................11527
250  Authority citation revised....................................16972
250.3  Amended.....................................................16972
    Amended;  eff. 1-6-95..........................................62983
250.17  (f) added; eff. 1-6-95.....................................62983
250.30  (b)(2)(ii), (c)(4)(iii), (vii), (xiii), (d), (e), 
        (f)(1)(i), (iii), (4), (k)(1), (3), (m)(1) introductory 
        text, (n)(4) and (o)(1) revised; (c)(1)(1) and (5) 
        redesignated as (c)(1)(i) and (4)(xvi); (a), (c)(1) 
        introductory text, (4)(ii), (viii)(D), (xv) and new (xvi) 
        amended; (c)(4)(xvii) and (xviii) added; (k)(4) and 
        (m)(1)(vii) removed; eff. 1-6-95...........................62984
250.41  (a)(1) amended.............................................16972
250.52  Added......................................................16973
251  Heading revised...............................................16974
251.2  (c) amended.................................................16974
251.3  (d) revised; (f) removed; (g) redesignated as (f)...........16974
251.4  (d)(3) revised; (h), (i) and (j) redesignated as (j), (k) 
        and (l); (c)(3), new (h) and (i) added; (d) and new (l) 
        amended....................................................16974
251.6  (a)(4) revised..............................................16974
251.7  (a) revised.................................................16974
251.8  Heading and (d) revised.....................................16974
251.9  (a) and (c) revised.........................................16975
251.10  (a)(2) and (d)(1) amended; (e)(2) revised; (e)(7), (g), 
        and (h) added..............................................16975
252.3  (c) amended; eff. 1-6-95....................................62986
252.4  (b), (c)(1), (4) introductory text and (iii) amended; 
        (c)(4)(i)(B) and (7) revised; (c)(14) through (17) 
        redesignated as (c)(15) through (18); new (c)(14) added; 
        eff. 1-6-95................................................62986
252.5  (c) amended; eff. 1-6-95....................................62987
253.2  (c) revised; interim.........................................1449
253.6  (b)(1) amended; interim......................................1449
254.2  (d) revised; interim.........................................1449
271.1  (b) amended.................................................29713
271.2  Amended........................................5698, 27434, 60062
    Regulation  at 54 FR 24527 confirmed and amended...............16095
    Regulation  at 59 FR 5698 eff. date corrected in part to 2-1-
92.................................................................22723
271.5  (e) added...................................................51354

[[Page 958]]

271.6  (b)(1)(ii), (iii), (vi) and (vii) amended...................29713
271.7  (d)(1)(ii) amended..........................................29713
271.8  Regulation at 54 FR 24527 confirmed.........................16095
272.1  (g)(7)(viii), (10), (17)(i)(B), (36), (84)(i) and (90) 
        amended; (g)(74)(1), (2) introductory text, (i) and (ii) 
        redesignated as (g)(74)(i), (ii) introductory text, (A) 
        and (B)....................................................29713
    (g)(130)  added.................................................2731
    (g)(131)  added.................................................5699
    Regulation  at 54 FR 24527 confirmed; (g)(132) added...........16095
    (g)(133)  added................................................16978
    Regulation  at 59 FR 5699 eff. date corrected in part to 2-1-
92.................................................................22723
    (g)(134)  added; interim.......................................30866
    (g)(135)  added................................................34561
    (g)(121)(ii)  revised; (g)(121)(iii) amended; (g)(137) added 
                                                                   44307
    (g)(136)  added................................................44310
    (g)(138)  added; interim.......................................50155
272.2  Regulation at 54 FR 24527 confirmed.........................16096
    (a)(2)  amended................................................29713
272.4  Regulation at 54 FR 24527 confirmed.........................16096
272.5  Regulation at 54 FR 24527 confirmed.........................16096
272.6  (c)(3) amended..............................................29713
272.8  (i) heading and introductory text amended...................29713
272.10  (a)(2)(iii) amended........................................29713
273.1  (e)(1)(iii) amended..........................................5699
    Regulation  at 59 FR 5699 eff. date corrected in part to 2-1-
92.................................................................22723
    (c)(3)(i),  (ii) and (e)(1)(i) amended.........................29713
273.2  Regulation at 54 FR 24528 confirmed; (b)(3), (c)(5), 
        (f)(8)(i)(A) and (ii) amended..............................16096
    (f)(1)(xi)  added; (j)(2) heading and (4)(i) revised; 
(j)(4)(iv)(A) amended..............................................44308
273.7  (o)(7) revised; (o)(8)(i) amended; (p)(4) added.............16978
273.8  Regulation at 54 FR 24529 confirmed.........................16096
    (i)(2)(i)  amended.............................................29713
    (e)(12)  revised...............................................44308
273.9  (c)(17) added................................................5699
    Regulation  at 54 FR 24529 confirmed...........................16096
    (c)(11)  introductory text amended; interim....................30866
    (d)(5)(i),  (6)(i)(A) and (ii) amended; (d)(5)(ii) heading 
revised............................................................44308
    (c)(1)(ii)(D)  revised.........................................44310
273.10  Regulation at 54 FR 24529 confirmed........................16096
    (d)(1)(i)  amended; interim....................................30866
    (d)(1)(i)  and (4) amended; interim............................50155
273.11  (f) heading revised; (f)(1) and (3) amended.................5699
    Regulation  at 54 FR 24530 confirmed...........................16096
    Regulation  at 59 FR 5699 eff. date corrected in part to 2-1-
92.................................................................22723
    (b)(1)(ii)(A)  and (B) amended.................................29713
273.12  Regulation at 54 FR 24530 confirmed........................16096
    (a)(1)(vi)  removed; (c) introductory text amended; interim....50155
273.13  (b)(14) added...............................................2731
    Regulation  at 54 FR 24530 confirmed...........................16096
273.15  (r)(2) amended.............................................29713
273.17  (i) removed................................................29713
273.18  (d)(3)(iv) through (viii), (4)(ii), (iii) and (h) through 
        (l) redesignated as (d)(3)(vi) through (x), (4)(iii), (iv) 
        and (i) through (m); (d)(3) introductory text and new 
        (d)(4)(iv) amended; new (iv), new (v), new (4)(ii) and new 
        (h) added; (d)(3)(iii), (4) heading, (i) and new (i)(1) 
        revised.....................................................2731
    (d)(2)  amended................................................29713
273.20  (a), (b) and (c) amended...................................29713
273.21  Regulation at 54 FR 24530 confirmed........................16096
    (a)(4),  (b), (f)(1)(iii)(D) and (j)(3)(iii) introductory text 
revised; (f)(2)(i) through (iv), (i), (r)(2)(i) and (s) amended....44308

[[Page 959]]

    (h)(3)  and (j)(3)(iii)(C) revised; (i) amended; 
(j)(3)(iii)(D) removed; (j)(3)(iii)(E) redesignated as 
(j)(3)(iii)(D); interim............................................50155
273.22  (f)(6)(iii)(A) amended.....................................29713
275.8  (a) amended.................................................29713
275.9  (c)(1) amended..............................................29713
275.23  (e)(5)(iii) revised........................................34561
276.2  (e)(3) revised...............................................2733
276.3  (b)(3) amended..............................................29713
276.7  (h)(4) amended..............................................29714
277.4  (b)(1) revised; (b)(11) and (12) added.......................2733
    Regulation  at 54 FR 24531 confirmed; (f) amended..............16096
277.16  (c)(1)(ii) and (iii) revised; (c)(1)(iv) added..............2733
277.18  (b), (c)(1) introductory text, (ii), (d)(1)(ii), (g) 
        heading, (1), (2) introductory text, (ii), (3), (5) 
        introductory text, (6), (7), (8) introductory text, (iv) 
        and (p)(5) amended..........................................2733
277  Appendix A amended.............................................2733
    Regulation  at 54 FR 24531 confirmed...........................16096
278.1  (j)(1) and (k)(1)(ii) amended...............................29714
278.2  (g) amended.................................................29714
278.5  (e) amended.................................................29714
    (a)(1)  amended; (a)(2) revised................................60062
278.6  (j) introductory text amended...............................27434
278.9  (j) added...................................................27434
    (k)  added.....................................................60062
279.1  Amended.....................................................29714
279.2  Heading, (a) and (b) amended................................29714
279.3  (a) and (b) amended.........................................29714
279.7  (b), (c) and (d) amended....................................29714
279.8  Heading, (a) introductory text, (1) and (b) through (g) 
        amended....................................................29714
279.9  (a) and (b) amended.........................................29714
279.10  (a) amended................................................29714
283  Added.........................................................34561

                                  1995

7 CFR
                                                                   60 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter II
Chapter  II Nomenclature change....................................19490
210.2  Amended.....................................................31207
210.4  (b)(3) introductory text amended............................31207
210.7  (c)(1)(v) and (d) amended...................................31207
210.8  (a)(2), (4) and (b)(2)(i) amended; (a)(2)(i) and (ii) 
        added; (a)(3) revised......................................31207
210.9  (b)(5), (c) introductory text and (1) amended...............31208
210.10  Redesignated as 210.10a; new 210.10 added..................31208
    (c)(1) table and (k)(2) table corrected........................57146
210.10a  Redesignated from 210.10..................................31208
    Heading revised; (c) table amended.............................31214
210.14  (c) revised................................................31215
210.15  (b)(2) revised; (b)(3) amended; (b)(4) removed; (b)(5) 
        redesignated as (b)(4).....................................31215
210.16  (b)(1) and (c)(3) amended..................................31215
210.18  (c) introductory text, (1), (2), (3), (d)(3) and (h)(2) 
        amended....................................................31215
    (c) introductory text corrected................................57147
210.19  (a)(1) through (5) redesignated as (a)(2) through (6); new 
        (a)(1) and (c)(6)(iii) added; new (a)(2) revised; new 
        (a)(3), (6), (c) introductory text, (1), (6)(i) and (ii) 
        amended....................................................31215
    (a)(1)(i) and (ii)(A) corrected................................57147
210  Appendixes A and C amended....................................31216
220.2  (b) and (t) amended; (m), (p-1) and (w-1) added.............31217
    (m) corrected..................................................57147
220.7  (e)(2) amended..............................................31217
220.8  Redesignated as 220.8a; new 220.8 added.....................31217
    (e)(2)(ii), (5)(iii), (7) and (11) corrected...................57147
220.8a  Redesignated from 220.8....................................31217
    Heading revised................................................31222

[[Page 960]]

220.9  (a) amended.................................................31222
220.13  (f)(3) and (4) redesignated as (f)(4) and (5); new (f)(3) 
        added......................................................31222
220.14  (h) amended................................................31222
220  Appendixes A and C amended....................................31222
235.1  Amended.....................................................15461
235.2  (r) and (s)(2) amended......................................15461
235.4  (a), (b) introductory text, (c), (d) and (e) redesignated 
        as (a)(1), (2), (d), (e) and (f); new (a) introductory 
        text, (b) introductory text, new (c), (d) heading, (e) 
        heading, (f) heading and (g) added; new (a)(1), new (2), 
        (b)(1), (3)(iv) and new (f) amended; (b)(2), (3) 
        introductory text and (4) revised..........................15461
235.5  (b)(1) amended; (e) revised.................................15462
235.6  (a) amended; (c) revised; (e), (g) and (h) redesignated as 
        (d), (e) and (f); new (g) added............................15462
    (g), (h) and (i) correctly redesignated as (f), (g) and (h)....57147
    (c) correctly revised; (g) correctly redesignated as (d).......57148
235.7  (b) and (c) amended.........................................15463
235.11  (b)(2), (3), (4) and (7) amended...........................15463
246.7  (e)(2)(ii), (iv), (4) introductory text and (vii) revised 
                                                                   19490
248  Regulation at 59 FR 11517 confirmed...........................49745
248.2  Amended.....................................................49745
248.4  (a)(16) removed; (a)(10)(ii) through (viii) and (17) 
        through (20) redesignated as (a)(10)(iii) through (ix), 
        and (16) through (19); (a)(8)(i), (15) and new (16) 
        revised; new (a)(10)(ii) and new (20) added................49746
248.8  (a) revised.................................................49746
248.10  (a) introductory text, (e)(2) and (4) amended; (a)(4) and 
        (d) introductory text revised..............................49746
248.11  (g) amended................................................49747
248.12  (a)(1)(ii) redesignated as (a)(1)(iii); (a)(1)(i) and new 
        (a)(1)(iii) amended; new (a)(1)(ii) and (b)(8) through 
        (13) added.................................................49747
248.14  (a)(1)(i), (iii), (d)(1), (2) and (e)(1) amended; (h), (i) 
        and (j) redesignated as (i), (j) and (k); (a)(1)(ii), (b), 
        (c), (d)(3), (g), new (i), new (j) and new (k) revised; 
        new (h) added..............................................49747
    (i) corrected..................................................57148
248.16  (f) amended................................................49748
    (f) corrected..................................................57148
248.17  (b) introductory text, (c)(1)(i) and (ii) amended..........49748
248.25  (a) revised................................................49748
    (a) corrected..................................................57148
248.26  Revised; OMB number........................................49748
271.2  Amended..............................................45996, 48869
272.1  (g)(139) added...............................................1708
    Regulation at 59 FR 50155 confirmed............................17630
    (g)(138) revised...............................................17631
    (g)(140) added.................................................20182
    (g)(141) added.................................................43349
    (g)(142) added.................................................43515
    (g)(143) added.................................................45996
    (g)(144) added.................................................48869
272.2  (a)(2) amended; (d)(1)(xi) added............................20182
    (a)(2) amended; (d)(1)(xii) added..............................45996
273.2  (f)(1)(xii) added...........................................48869
273.5  (b)(1), (2) and (3) redesignated as (b), (c) and (d); (a) 
        and new (b) revised........................................48869
273.7  (d)(1)(i)(C) revised.........................................1708
    (d)(1)(i)(C) correctly designated..............................37556
273.8  (e)(18) added...............................................43349
    (e)(11)(vi) removed; (e)(11)(vii) through (e)(11)(xi) 
redesignated as (e)(11)(vi) through (x)............................48869
273.10  Regulation at 59 FR 50155 confirmed........................17630
    (d)(4) amended.................................................17631
273.12  Regulation at 59 FR 50155 confirmed........................17630
273.16  (a)(1), (e)(4), (9)(iii) and (i)(5) amended; (b), (e)(3), 
        (8)(iii), (f)(2)(iii), (g)(2)(ii), (h)(1)(ii)(C) and 
        (2)(ii) revised............................................43515
273.18  (g)(5) and (6) added.......................................45996
273.21  Regulation at 59 FR 50155 confirmed........................17630
    (f)(2)(iv) and (i) amended; (j)(3)(iii)(C) revised.............17631

[[Page 961]]

274.2  (b)(2), (3) and (4) removed; (b)(1), (c), (d) and (e) 
        redesignated as (b), (d), (e) and (f); new (d)(2) and (3) 
        redesignated as (d)(3) and (4); (a) and new (b) amended; 
        (b) heading, new (d)(1) and new (3) revised; new (c), new 
        (d)(2) and (g) added.......................................20182
274.3  (e)(1) revised..............................................20183
274.11  Heading, (a) heading, introductory text and (1) revised....20183

                                  1996

7 CFR
                                                                   61 FR
                                                                    Page
Chapter II
210.10  (k)(3)(i) amended..........................................37671
210.10a  (d)(2)(i) amended.........................................37671
210  Appendix A amended............................................37671
225.2  Amended.....................................................25553
225.15  (f)(2)(iii), (iv) and (3) introductory text revised; 
        (f)(2)(vi) and (3) amended; (f)(4) added...................25553
225.16  (f)(3) amended.............................................37672
225.20  Table revised (OMB numbers)................................25554
226.2  Amended.....................................................25554
226.15  (e)(2) and (3) revised.....................................25554
226.17  (b)(7) revised.............................................25554
226.18  (f) amended................................................25554
226.19  (b)(8)(i) revised..........................................25554
226.19a  (b)(8) revised............................................25554
226.23  (e)(1)(ii)(D), (F), (iii)(D), (E) and (4) amended; 
        (h)(2)(iv) through (h)(2)(viii) redesignated as (h)(2)(v) 
        through (ix); (h)(2)(iii) designated in part as 
        (h)(2)(iv); (e)(1)(ii)(C), (iii)(C) and new (h)(2)(iii) 
        revised....................................................25554
250.30  (t) added...................................................5272
271  Technical correction...................................55188, 58281
271.2  Amended................................53600, 54279, 54290, 60010
272  Technical correction..........................................55188
272.1  (g)(145) added..............................................19159
    (g)(146) added.................................................33643
    (g)(148) added.................................................54290
    (g)(149) added.................................................54297
    (g)(150) added.................................................54302
    (g)(151) added.................................................54279
    (g)(74)(ii)(A)(A) and (B) redesignated as (g)(74)(ii)(A)(1) 
and (2); (g)(147) added............................................54315
    (g)(151) corrected.............................................58281
    (g)(152) added.................................................60010
272.4  (a)(2) amended..............................................60010
272.7  Revised.....................................................60010
272.9  Amended.....................................................53600
273  Technical correction...................................55188, 58281
273.1  (a)(2)(i)(B) and (C) revised; (a)(2)(i)(D) removed; 
        (a)(2)(ii), (e)(1)(ii) and (f)(2) introductory text 
        amended....................................................54279
    (e)(1)(i) amended..............................................54316
273.2  (f)(1)(ii)(A), (D), (v), (i)(4)(i)(B), (iii) introductory 
        text and (iv) amended; (g)(2) redesignated as (g)(3); 
        (c)(2)(iii), new (g)(2), (i)(4)(iii)(D) and (E) added; 
        (i)(4)(iii)(A), (B) and (C) revised........................54316
    (f)(1)(xiii) added; (f)(8)(i)(A) amended.......................54290
273.3  Existing text designated as (a) and amended; (b) added......54317
273.4  (a)(2) amended; (a)(9) and (11) removed; (a)(10) 
        redesignated as (a)(9).....................................54317
273.6  (b)(4) added................................................54317
273.7  (c)(4)(xiv) and (xv) added; (d)(1)(ii)(A) amended...........54279
273.8  (e)(11)(x) removed..........................................54297
    (e)(2) amended.................................................54317
    (h)(1)(v), (6) and (i)(4) amended; (h)(1)(vi) added; (h)(3) 
revised............................................................54280
273.9  (b)(1)(vi) added; (b)(2)(iv) and (c)(4) amended; (c)(3) and 
        (5)(ii)(B) revised; (c)(5)(i)(D), (ii)(C) and (10)(xi) 
        removed; (c)(5)(i)(E), (F) and (G) redesignated as 
 
</pre></body></html>
